# 3.01. Early Republic Scenario {#3.01}

[← III. Scenarios](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

### 3.01.1 EARLY REPUBLIC SCENARIO OVERVIEW {#3.01.1}

Below are the steps for setting up the Early Republic Scenario. The other Scenarios will reference this setup procedure.

### 3.01.2 GAME BOARD {#3.01.2}

Place the Game Board so that each player has space off-board to display his Faction's cards. Give each player a Faction Treasury Box

### 3.01.3 MARKERS {#3.01.3}

Place the 36 Mortality Chits in an opaque cup suitable for random draws. The State Treasury starts with 100 Talents. The Unrest Level starts at 0.

### 3.01.4 CARDS {#3.01.4}

Set up the Early Republic (white) deck as follows:

A. Start with the white-bordered cards.

B. Place the 1st Punic War card in the Inactive Wars section of the Forum.

C. Separate the 20 black-text Family cards and randomly deal 3 face-up to each player. Return all the remaining Family cards to the Early Republic deck.

D. Shuffle the Early Republic deck and deal out 3 cards face-down to each player. Players should keep any Faction card they get, but any Forum card should be discarded face-up when received and replaced with another card. Repeat until all players have a hand of 3 hidden Faction cards. Shuffle the discarded Forum cards back into the Early Republic deck.

E. Separate 6 random cards from the Middle Republic (gray) deck and combine them with 6 random cards from the Early Republic deck along with the "Era Ends" card. Shuffle these cards and place them at the bottom of the Early Republic deck.

F. Put the remaining Middle and Late Republic (red) decks aside.

G. Place the finished Early Republic deck in the Draw Pile space on the Game Board.

### 3.01.5 LEGIONS {#3.01.5}

Four Legions are put in the Active Forces boxes.

### 3.01.6 TEMPORARY ROME CONSUL {#3.01.6}

Draw a Mortality Chit from the cup. If the ID# drawn does not match an existing Senator put it to the side and draw again until a matching ID# is drawn. The matching ID# is Temporary Rome Consul until new Consuls can be elected during the first Senate Phase. Place the Rome Consul and Prior Consul markers on his card and add 5 to his Influence. Place all the Mortality Chits back into the cup.

### 3.01.7 FACTION LEADERS {#3.01.7}

Each player (starting with the Temporary Rome Consul and proceeding clockwise) places a Faction Leader marker containing the symbol of his Faction on one of his Senators.

### 3.01.8 PROVINCES {#3.01.8}

No Provinces are currently in play.

### 3.01.9 INITIAL FACTION PHASE {#3.01.9}

Each player (starting with the Temporary Rome Consul and proceeding clockwise) may play any Statesmen or Concessions from his hand, if he wishes. Faction cards may not be traded until the first Revolution Phase.
