# 3.02. Middle Republic Scenario

[← III. Scenarios](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

## 3.02 MIDDLE REPUBLIC SCENARIO {#3.02}

### 3.02.1 MIDDLE REPUBLIC SCENARIO OVERVIEW {#3.02.1}

The setup for the Middle Republic is the same as the Early Republic, except for the following:

### 3.02.2 CARDS {#3.02.2}

Set up the Middle Republic (gray) deck as follows:

A. Start with the gray-bordered cards.

B. No cards are placed in the Forum.

C. Separate and combine the 25 black-text Family cards from the Early (white) and Middle Republic decks and randomly deal 4 face-up to each player. Return all the remaining Family cards to the Middle Republic deck.

D. Add the 13 Concessions cards from the Early Republic deck to the Middle Republic deck.

E. Separate and shuffle all the non-Statesman Faction cards from the Early Republic deck. Randomly draw 6 Faction cards from this pile and add them to the Middle Republic deck without looking at them.

F. Shuffle the Middle Republic deck and deal out 3 cards face-down to each player. Players should keep any Faction card they get, but any Forum card should be discarded face-up when received and replaced with another card. Repeat until all players have a hand of 3 hidden Faction cards. Shuffle the discarded Forum cards back into the Middle Republic deck.

G. Separate 6 random cards from the Late Republic (red) deck and combine them with 6 random cards from the Middle Republic deck along with the "Era Ends" card. Shuffle these cards and place them at the bottom of the Middle Republic deck.

H. Put the remaining Early and Late Republic decks aside.

I. Place the finished Middle Republic deck in the Draw Pile space on the Game Board.

### 3.02.3 LEGIONS {#3.02.3}

Six Legions are put in the Active Forces boxes.

### 3.02.4 PROVINCES {#3.02.4}

Shuffle the Undeveloped Province cards of Sicilia, Illyricum, Sardinia et Corsica, Hispania Citerior, Hispania Ulterior, and Gallia Cisalpina and deal 1 to each player, with any remaining being placed in the Forum. Each player assigns his Province to one of his Senators and sets the term dial to 1, 2, or 3 turns (his choice).
