# 3.03. Late Republic Scenario {#3.03}

[← III. Scenarios](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

### 3.03.1 LATE REPUBLIC SCENARIO OVERVIEW {#3.03.1}

The setup for the Late Republic is done the same as the Early Republic, except for the following:

### 3.03.2 CARDS {#3.03.2}

Set up the Late Republic (red) deck as follows:

A. Start with the red-bordered cards. Add the Middle Republic Statesmen cards Marius [27A] and Sulla [1C].

B. No cards are placed in the Forum.

C. All Law cards from the Middle Republic (gray) deck are placed in the Laws space and considered in play \[EXCEPTION: the Servilian and Acilian Laws are removed from the Game\].

D. Separate and combine the 30 black-text Family cards from the Early (white), Middle, and Late Republic decks and randomly deal 5 face-up to each player. Return all the remaining Family cards to the Late Republic deck.

E. Add all 13 Concessions cards from the Early Republic deck to the Late Republic deck.

F. Separate and shuffle all the non-Statesman Faction cards from the Early and Middle Republic decks. Randomly draw 6 Faction cards from this pile and add them to the Late Republic deck without looking at them.

G. Shuffle the Late Republic deck and deal out 3 cards face-down to each player. Players should keep any Faction cards they get, but any Forum card should be discarded face-up when received and replaced with another card. Repeat until all players have a hand of 3 hidden Faction cards. Shuffle the discarded Forum cards back into the Late Republic deck.

H. Separate 10 random cards from the Late Republic deck and add the "Era Ends" card. Shuffle these cards and place them at the bottom of the Late Republic deck.

I. Put the remaining Early and Middle decks aside.

J. Place the finished Late Republic deck in the Draw Pile space on the Game Board.

### 3.03.3 LEGIONS {#3.03.3}

Eight Legions are put in the Active Forces boxes.

### 3.03.4 PROVINCES {#3.03.4}

Shuffle the Developed Province cards of Sicilia, Illyricum, Sardinia et Corsica, Hispania Citerior, Hispania Ulterior, and Gallia Cisalpina and deal 1 to each player, with any remaining being placed in the Forum. The Undeveloped Province cards of Gallia Narbonensis, Cilicia et Cyprus, Macedonia, Africa, and Asia are likewise distributed. \[EXCEPTION: In a six-player Game, each player rolls dice ([1.04.8](../01-basic-game/1.04-game-terms-and-concepts.md#1.04.8)) to determine who will not receive a Governorship.\]

Each player assigns his Province to one of his Senators and sets the term dial to 1, 2, or 3 turns (his choice).
