# 6.01. Player's Notes

[← VI. Notes](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

## 6.01 PLAYER'S NOTES {#6.01}

### NOVICE {#6.01-novice}

Here you stand, wide-eye and innocent, about to leap into your first game of REPUBLIC OF ROME . . . the Early Republic scenario to boot. Good, it's the toughest! You barely grasp the rules, but it is clear to you that this is not your average wargame. If you are playing with experience players, well, Bunky, you're dead meat. Just try to pick an ally and stick with him for a while. As long as you're making yourself useful, he'll probably throw you an occasional bone. You probably won't win, but at least you'll have a say in who does. And who knows, maybe you'll get lucky. You can also improve your chances by keeping the following pointers in mind:

1. Stick together! Unlike your average user-friendly game, this one's a killer. It's designed to tempt you and drag you down to your demise. Novices who play too aggressively will soon find themselves facing the choice of a glorious death on the spears of a hostile phalanx or a somewhat more sordid one at the hands of an angry mob.
2. Knock off the Punic and Macedonian Wars as soon as possible with as much force as you can bring to bear. Don't get cute. If you fool around with stalemates until Matching Wars or Hannibal appear, all the co-operation in the world may not be enough. There is time enough to be devious once Carthage has been eliminated.
3. Build a big army early. Manpower shortages always seem to occur when the Active War count reaches critical mass.
4. Use your own funds to throw games—lots of them. This is better for the health of the State than land bills, and will make fewer enemies.
5. Don't let Concessions sit in the Forum or your hand unused. Pass them out freely in exchange for favors. Above all, don't play them on yourself until you've established your Popularity or guaranteed control of the Censor unless you want to get a first hand view of the receiving end of a Prosecution.
6. Try to win the game on points by exhausting the deck with a healthy Rome. Other methods are too volatile for a newcomer.
7. Don't allow the others to take extra Initiatives cheaply, but insist on them yourself only when you have something to gain such as another Persuasion Attempt versus an attractive and vulnerable Senator. Otherwise, bank the difference while your opponents spend their money.
8. Beware the Temporary Rome Consul. As the only Senator with prior Consular experience he automatically becomes Censor on turn one. Allowing his faction to continue in power may give him too big a lead to overcome. He may offer great payments in exchange for the necessary votes to retain a consulship among his faction. Don't let him do it cheaply.
9. Stick together! I said it before but it bears repeating. Don't make early enemies. Like RISK, the game is rarely won in the early going. With reasonable precautions, it should take at least six turns before anyone is in position to win. Bide your time and wait for your opportunity.

### INTERMEDIATE {#6.01-intermediate}

Now that you've played a few games, you're probably ready to start cutting some throats, so let's get a bit more specific.

1. Use your power as Rome Consul like a surgeon uses a scalpel. Think ahead. You should always have a plan not only for what you want to accomplish in this Senate phase, but the next one as well. By increasing your Popularity now or sending an opponent off to a province, you may make one of your Senators a likelier candidate for Consul next turn. You have tremendous power in your ability to put bills on the floor and control the order of voting. Always make your opponents vote first and your friends vote last. As consul, you should always have money in your Personal Treasury with which to carry close votes.
2. When making proposals, combine Governorships or Concession measures into a single bill to gain widespread support for their passage. Don't be timid. Make offers. Politics is a game of greed at any level and every politician has his price. Don't be afraid to cut yourself out of the deal in exchange for promised votes on other measures. Spend your Intrigue cards as bribes in exchange for needed votes or support. There is always a way to get what you want by creating the right circumstances.
3. If you have the best General, use him to win an early victory and then withdraw him from politics. You can then be a bit of an Obstructionist, voting against raising armies and the like in the hope that an unstable State will be forced to seek your services. A Dictator can often write his own ticket while fending off disaster.
4. Avoid the appearance of being in the lead. Even the weakest player can be in the best position as a compromise candidate when others are chasing a dominant faction. If cut out of the action by a dominant coalition, kill them with kindness…pick one leader and shower him with support. Only by creating a clear leader can you weaken his coalition and unite all against him.
5. Don't look at a Governorship as an exile. It allows you to build a power base while relatively free of the dangers of being in Rome. Verres boasted that a third of his loot was reserved for his prosecutors, a third for the jurists, and a third for himself. A large Faction Treasury transferred to the returning Governor's Personal Treasury upon his return to Rome can buy a lot of friends if need be.
6. Spend early cash to attract Knights. Spend late cash on bribes.

### ADVANCED {#6.01-advanced}

By now you have realized, as one tester told me, that this game makes most look like CHUTES & LADDERS. I designed it for those who think DIPLOMACY is too tame. There are many subtle ways to gain advantage over even experienced players. Here are but a few:

1. Only in the Late Republic Scenario should you plan on a victory by conquest. Only in this scenario is it easy to get the necessary Legion allegiance to a Commander vs. the State. However, because of this and the lessened strength of foreign Wars, the Senate should be reluctant to entrust any Commander with a dominant Army. To overcome this, you'll need to build a large Faction Treasury and pass the necessary Laws when you're ready to strike.
2. Use the power of the Censor. Always prosecute vulnerable Senators. Even the threat of prosecution is worth something…get value for your promise to withhold prosecution.
3. Always add to your Faction Treasury. It is the only thing that can't be taken from you in a changing environment and it is the only source of power that cannot be readily counted and used against you.
4. Think deviously. So you want to be Censor. You can afford to be generous. Nominate your rival as Censor, but vote last. If it looks as though he will be elected, veto the proposal. One less candidate to worry about and if yours is the last eligible candidate, well…
5. Once an opposing Senator reaches 21 Influence always be wary of a Consul for Life vote. Keep funds in your Personal Treasury to combat any such vote. If you have such a Senator, look for opportunities to swing such a vote by sending influential Senators out of Rome to fight wars or govern lucrative Provinces.
6. Go easy on the assassinations. They were not prevalent in Roman history and for that reason the penalties for invoking them have been made especially severe. In a well-played game, a player never plans to be an assassin…rather he plans how to force another player to be the assassin. For example, during a Consul for Life vote which appears as though it will be successful, the HRAO wields tremendous power by determining the order of vote. The last opposing player called upon to vote will have the choice of being an assassin or allowing the game to end. The faction with the most to lose should be forced to sit in that uncomfortable seat.
7. Use your imagination. There is no such thing as a bad Intrigue card, only bad players. For example, on the surface, the Julian Law card would seem to be detrimental to the faction which plays it. But when the Land Bills are exhausted, the Unrest Level is high, and a Manpower Shortage is in effect how much will your fellow players pay to see this card fall? Surely the next Consulship/Censorship can be yours.
8. Be flexible. There are many ways to win and the best ones are the least obvious. Just because one plan fails, all is not lost. An epidemic can turn a have-not into the new leader in a single turn. A player is never out of REPUBLIC OF ROME as long as he doesn't give up.

*Robert Haines*
