# 6.02. Historical Notes {#6.02}

[← VI. Notes](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

The Roman Republic was born c. 509 B.C. when the young city-state threw out its last king, Tarquin the Proud. The new state then spent its first two centuries making the transition from aristocracy of birth to oligarchy of wealthy (the Struggle of the Orders) and developing the machinery of republican government. By 287 B.C. the finished republican constitution had emerged.

The Republic possessed a hierarchy of annually elected magistrates, the highest of which were the two consuls. They and the next rank of officials, the praetors, were normally the only individuals with the power to command military forces, but in times of crisis the consuls and Senate could together nominate a dictator, who would in turn choose an assistant, his master of horse. These temporary magistrates could hold office for at most six months, but during their tenure, their power was superior to that of the regular officials. The Senate might also choose to extend the power of a consul or praetor beyond the normal year in office by making him a proconsul or proprietor, both of whom could command troops.

Important in domestic affairs were the two censors and the pontifex maximus, the former elected for an eighteen-month term every five years, the latter for life. The censors controlled the census and the Senatorial rolls, possessing the power to eject members from the Senate, while the pontifex maximus headed Rome's secular religious establishment. Finally, there were the ten annually elected tribunes, who possessed the important powers of initiating legislation and vetoing any act of the government.

Of the Republic's four citizen assemblies only two were of any importance: the Centuriate, which elected the consuls, praetors and censors, and the Tribal, which elected the tribunes and passed legislation. The Senate was made up of ex-consuls and ex-praetors, who held their seats for life, and until the last half century of the Republic it had a membership of about 300. The Senate was simply an advisory body and after 287 B.C had no actual constitutional power.

Rome of the Republic remained in theory a democracy, and the people were the sovereign authority, electing, legislating, and declaring war. But in actuality the Republic was controlled by an oligarchy of wealth, centered in the Senate. The magistracies were theoretically open to all citizens, but in practice were restricted to the wealthy, who thus composed the Senate. Though it lacked any legal powers, the Senatorial oligarchy was easily able to dominate the legislative processes of the Tribal assembly, and the magistrates, who were constitutionally independent, were in reality the executive arm of the Senate.

Being of similar class (and being Romans), the Senatorial nobility had a unity of purpose and action in its direction of Rome, but the families who made up this ruling class were constantly struggling for preeminence within the Senate. What motivated them was not so much wealth or power, as the competition for the prestige gained by serving Rome, and the goal of the Senatorial statesman was to excel his colleagues in prestige and become recognized as the unofficial "Dean of the Senate"—the princeps senatus.

Until the last century of the Republic the Roman people were quite content with the rule of the Senatorial oligarchy, which served the state extremely well. While the internal restructuring was going on in the fourth and fifth centuries, Rome managed to conquer and unite the Italian peninsula, creating the power base for her overseas adventures. She won mastery of the western Mediterranean by destroying the power of Carthage (First Punic War 264-241 B.C., Second Punic War 218-201 B.C.) and was then drawn into the Balkan Peninsula by Philip V of Macedon, who had joined Hannibal in the war on Rome (First Macedonian War 214-205 B.C.). Philip's defeat in the Second Macedonian War (200-196 B.C.) quickly led to a confrontation with the last great Mediterranean power, the Seleucid Empire in Asia, and Antiochus III fared no better than Philip (192-189 B.C.). There were many more wars to be fought, and the Romans had yet to occupy most of the real estate of Europe and the Mediterranean, but after 189 B.C. the Republic no longer had any serious rivals for control of the western world.

On the domestic front, however, the eastern wars, following hard on the heels of Hannibal's devastating sojourn in Italy, created serious social and economic problems, as what was essentially a city-state government with a citizen militia struggled to meet the demands of a growing empire. Major reform was needed, but the period had also seen dramatic growth in the power of the Senatorial oligarchy, which in the course of the second century looked more and more to its own interests rather than those of the Republic. Even moderate reform was resisted by a short-sighted and self-interested Senate, and in 133 B.C. T. Sempronius Gracchus, using unprecedented but perfectly legal tactics, gained control of the Tribal assembly and began a revolutionary assault on the traditional authority of the Senate.

So began the Roman Revolution, a century long collapse of the Republic that would end only in 31 B.C. Resisting any change was the majority of the Senate, known as the Optimates; they had the advantage of unity of purpose, wealth and extensive control of the government machinery. Opposing them were the Populares, a mixed bag of anti-Senatorial forces, usually led by the dissenting minority in the Senate. The earliest leaders of the Populares, such as the Gracchi brothers, were true reformers, but very quickly the attack on the Optimates became simply an avenue for the politically ambitious, as the reform movement degenerated into civil strife and finally into civil war.

The Senate resisted the reform bill of T. Gracchus, but before his death in a riot Gracchus had demonstrated that it was possible to gain at least temporary control of the Tribal assembly and pass measures against the wishes of the Senate. The weakness of the Senate—that all its power was based on nothing more than custom—had been made clear, while the Senate had shown itself unwilling to countenance even the most moderate reform. G. Gracchus was perhaps more politically minded than his brother and attempted in 123-122 B.C. to build a more permanent anti-Senatorial base by attracting the support of the Knights, the wealthy class of businessmen, who had until now been essentially apolitical. In this he was essentially successful, but his work was quickly undone when he and the rest of the Populares leadership were killed in a Senate inspired riot.

The Senate had defended itself with violence, and it was not long before the use of force was formalized and escalated by the introduction of the military into politics. The last decades of the second century saw the rise of G. Marius, an eminently successful general who rode his popularity to leadership of the Populares and an unprecedented six consulships in eight years. Marius, whose military reforms furthered the professionalization of the legions, used his veterans in Rome only as political workers and toughs, never as military units, but his actions pointed the way to the emergence of the client army, whose primary loyalty was to the commander rather than the state. The first commander actually to bring legions into Rome itself was L. Cornelius Sulla, who led the Senatorial counterattack in the 90's and 80's. Sulla earned his military reputation and loyal veterans in the great allied revolt (Social War 91-87 B.C.), which brought Roman citizenship to the Italian allies, and in his victory over King Mithridates VI of Pontus in Asia Minor (88-85 B.C.). When he returned from Asia he defeated the Marian forces in Rome's first civil war, and by the time of his death in 78 B.C. the Senate seemed once again firmly in control.

But appearances, especially in politics, can be deceiving. Violence was now firmly embedded in the political system, and there were too many ambitious men ready to follow the examples of Marius and Sulla. The rest of the Revolution can still be seen in terms of Optimates and Populares, but the real contest was now among a group of tremendously powerful individuals and ultimately their armies. More and more, foreign policy became simply a reflection of domestic struggles, as the political contenders sought military commands as a way to gain money, reputations, and above all veteran armies for the contest in Rome.

The next generation of leaders came from the ranks of Sulla's own lieutenants. Cn. Pompeius (Pompey the Great) and M. Licinius Crassus both took advantage of military crises in Spain and Italy (Sertorian War 80-72 B.C., Revolt of Spartacus 72-71 B.C.) to gain armies with which they then intimidated the Senate. The Senate refused to face reality and ally with Pompey and instead did everything to drive him into the arms of Crassus, a rich Knight and natural leader of the Populares. The two men began falling out during the 60's, as Pompey gained a greater (and largely unwarranted) military reputation by clearing the Mediterranean of pirates and campaigning in the east (Third Mithridatic War 72-66 B.C.). However, civil war was averted by the young G. Julius Caesar, who in 60 B.C. brought the two leaders and himself into a private political alliance: the First Triumvirate. Caesar spent the 50's conquering Gaul, and in 53 B.C. Crassus got himself killed fighting the Parthians, thereby simplifying the political situation. The showdown came in 49 B.C., when Caesar invaded Italy, and was essentially over the following year, when a defeated Pompey was assassinated in Egypt.

The Republic was quite dead by 44 B.C., when Caesar was assassinated, but Rome had to face the agony of one more civil war. Caesar's lieutenants, M. Antonius (Marc Antony) and M. Aemilius Lepidus, and his grandnephew and personal heir, G. Octavious (Octavian), formed the Second Triumvirate in 43 B.C. In the course of the 30's Lepidus was set aside. Octavian gained control of Italy and the west and Antony established himself in the east in alliance with Cleopatra. The war came and the Revolution ended in 31 B.C. with the defeat and suicide of Antony and Cleopatra. In 27 B.C. Octavian began laying the foundation of the Principate, an autocracy clothed in republican garb. He took the name Augustus and the title Princeps and became Rome's first emperor.

*Richard M. Berthold*
