# 6.03. Designer Notes

[← VI. Notes](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

## 6.03 DESIGNER NOTES {#6.03}

REPUBLIC OF ROME represents a distillation of 250 years of Roman history, from about 265 B.C. to 44 B.C. Prior to this period the Roman constitution was still taking shape amidst the Struggle of the Orders, and after Julius Caesar, traditional Senatorial politics, battered for several generations by the rise of the client armies, are dead. Even within this period there is a sharp change in the political scene with the advent of the Revolution in 133 B.C., when personal ambition began rapidly to overtake concern for the Republic as a primary motivation among Senators. REPUBLIC OF ROME, with its player goal of dominating the state, in fact has more in common with the century of the Revolution, but factional politics were a characteristic of the Senate throughout the history of the Republic.

The game was originally designed as a more or less purely political simulation, with random wars and a given number of governorships providing a typical environment for the mid-Republican government. It evolved, however, into a more historical game, in which the players actually build the empire from scratch and thus develop and change the political environment in which they are competing. The major wars, personalities, events and political developments of the period are reflected in the Forum cards, which are separated into three decks in order to provide a more historical framework. The first group (white) is roughly the period 265-189 B.C., the second (gray) 188-100 B.C., and the last (red) 99-44 B.C.

The War cards represent the major conflicts of the period and have been assigned their values on the basis of the actual wars, although these values are to a degree "false", since in the game they are not likely to occur in exact chronological order. Those that were more or less precipitated by the Romans, such as the Second Macedonian War, have been categorized as Inactive in order to give the players some choice in when to fight them. With a few exceptions the fleet requirements represent necessary transport, rather than naval combat potential. It may seem, incidentally, that the military threats in the game are excessive, what with the potential multiplicative effect of wars, but bear in mind that Rome grew up in a tough world. The hope is that the possibility of a devastating war situation will instill in players something of the national security paranoia that seemed to move the Senate.

The Province cards have likewise been based on their real world counterparts, and here also there is a degree of historical distortion. In the game all the provinces are created automatically by the appropriate wars, and this was far from being the case with the actual Roman provinces. The Senate was in fact loathe to take up the burdens associated with the direct territorial rule and, where it could, avoided taking on provinces, preferring to control areas through client states. We adopted the war-creates-province mechanism because it is simpler. The governorships are also simplified; by the late Republic the posts were automatically filled by the previous year's consuls and praetors, but we made them elective and lengthened the term of office in order to add more vote stability and political action to the game. "Improvement" of a province simply reflects the development of its economy and infrastructure.

The actual political structure of the Republic is simplified in the game. With the exception of the tribunes all the offices below the consulship are ignored for the sake of playability. The tribunes, with their powerful twin weapons of veto and legislative initiation, could not be ignored, but since ten of them were elected every year it seemed reasonable and far more playable to represent their adherence to a faction with random cards. Further, there were actually two censors, elected every five years for 18-month terms, and they did not bring prosecutions for corruption, as they do in the game. They did have the power to remove members of the Senate for grave misconduct, however, that is what is reflected in their prosecutorial power. A player's option to appeal to the people during a prosecution represents the basic right of provocation, which allowed a citizen to appeal a magisterial decision to the people. The dictator (and his master of horse) was actually given a maximum of six months in power, and the office was resorted to very rarely. The extra voting strength of the pontifex maximus and priests on questions of military expeditions reflect their ability to sway superstitious opinion through control of the religious establishment.

Completely ignored in the game are the Roman citizen assemblies, but until the Revolution these were little more than rubber stamps for the Senate, and after 133 B.C. they were essentially the tools of ambitious Senators. The bottom line is that for most of Republican history the politics of the Senate were the politics of Rome, and not until the Revolution did the people, or at least those who lived in Rome, play a direct political role, and even then it was a limited one. The Roman people are, however, given some influence in the game through the mechanism of the Unrest Level, which was added primarily to provide another distraction for the Senate to worry about. Games and land bills, which provided for Roman colonies and thus opportunities for poor citizens, were in fact used to please the populace, but mostly during the Revolution and essentially to win their support for some individual politician, rather than to stave off a popular revolt. The Roman Republic actually never faced any real possibility of a revolt of the people, but we wanted to put yet more pressure on the Senate to deal with domestic concerns and thereby give the populus Romanus some role in the game.

The heart of the game is the Senate meeting. Throughout most of the Republican period the Senate numbered about 300 and, until the Revolution, presented a more or less united front in its direction of Roman policy. Behind that front, however, the Senate was a swirling pool of constantly changing alliances among the families that made up the Senatorial nobility. While the Senate as a whole was generally united in common action (until the Revolution) for the good of Rome, at the same time the individual Senators were continually jockeying to improve their position and influence in the body.

Each Senator card represents the current leading member of that particular family, the families included in the game being the most important for the period. The numbers on the cards are historically arbitrary and differ from family to family simply to add variety. One may understand the larger Oratory numbers (votes) of some Senators as representing their control of lesser lights in the Senate. The Statesmen cards do represent historical figures, and their numbers to some degree reflect the characteristics of that individual. But individuals are in many ways shaped by their circumstances, and in that respect these Statesmen are historically "inaccurate", since in the game they are unlikely to appear in their exact historical environment. This fact is most obvious in the special characteristics assigned to each: as examples, Fabius Maximus halves losses in combat because his "Fabian" tactics against Hannibal reduced casualties, and Sulla's Loyalty rating is 0 if in the same faction with Marius because historically the two men were enemies—and this game technique encourages their gravitating to different factions.

In a similar vein many of the Leaders, such as Spartacus, were given the ability to influence Wars/Revolts with which they were not historically associated. This provides for more frequent use of the Leaders, who might match several conflicts rather than just one, and increases the threat potential of most of the Wars/Revolts. One might consequently think of the Leaders in more general terms. Vercingetorix, for example, being a generic good Gallic commander. Further, since Leaders and Statesmen often remain in the game for a long period, they might also be viewed as father-son teams, in which the son carries on the father's policies.

We do not know all that much about procedural rules in the Senate, but certainly the Senate meeting of the game is more formal and limiting than what was historically the case. It was necessary to add many restrictions in order to make the game work and prevent players from exploiting many unhistorical and game-distorting possibilities inherent in a more wide open meeting. Incidentally, the selection of a Field Consul and a Rome Consul has no historical basis, but makes the game easier to play. Further, widespread bribery, represented in the game by the ability to buy votes, was historically limited to the period of the Revolution, but we needed a way for a player to translate economic power directly into political power and thus the exaggeration was allowed.

Many of the economic aspects of the game are also misleading. The Senatorial oligarchy, especially in the years before the Revolution, represented landed wealth, and commercial matters were for the most part left in the hands of the Knights, Senators in fact being legally barred from many business activities. In order to provide more income and more action in the Senate, however, we have allowed commercial opportunities that would have been handled by Knights to be assigned to Senators in the form of Concessions. The Knights themselves were essentially apolitical until the Revolution, but we include them in a manner that reflects the added economic and political influence that accrued to a faction that established alliances within the business community. A tax farmer, by the way, was some individual or group (inevitably Knights) that contracted with the state to collect the taxes of a province; this notorious and corruption prone system was changed after the collapse of the Republic.

Most of the Event and Intrigue cards are generic and serve the standard purpose of adding variety and sudden changes of fortune to the game, although it should be noted that much of the activity on the Intrigue cards is more characteristic of the Revolution. Some of the Events do represent actual occurrences in Republican history as indicated by their dates, and while most are self-explanatory, a few are not. The proscription was used by Sulla (and later Octavian and Anthony) to eliminate enemies and acquire their property and consisted of publishing lists of people who could be "legally" killed as enemies of the state; 2600 Knights died in Sulla's proscription. The trial of Verres, an obviously corrupt ex-governor, was historically insignificant, except in that it brought into political prominence Cicero, who prosecuted the case. The same can be said of the Catilinarian conspiracy of 63 B.C., which because it happened during the consulship of Cicero is well documented.

The rules of the political game in Rome changed dramatically during the Revolution, which comprised the last century of the Republic. These changes are represented by the Law cards, which in fact do alter the rules of the game in ways reflective of the changes that actually took place during those troubled years. Perhaps the most important of these is the Military Reforms card, the appearance of which means the game can no longer be won with Influence alone. Many factors led to the direct involvement of the military in the political arena, but the military reforms of Marius were probably the most important in this rise of the client army, which was more loyal to its general than to the state. What this development meant was that political influence was no longer the end, but only the means to gain military support, which had become the ultimate and only secure form of political power.

Of the possible ways to win the game, gaining supremacy through influence is the only one historically correct for all but the last 50 years of the Republic, since being recognized princeps senatus, unofficial leader of the Senate, meant surpassing your colleagues in prestige and influence. In reality of course being princeps senatus never meant absolute domination of the state—there could in fact be several principes senatus—but it was as close as you could come. Gaining complete control of the state through a military coup is something that was possible only during the last decades of the Republic, as is the notion of Consul for Life, which in reality presumed you already had a military dictatorship (Caesar).

*Richard M. Berthold*
