# 6.04. The Making of Republic of Rome

[← VI. Notes](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

## 6.04 THE MAKING OF REPUBLIC OF ROME {#6.04}

REPUBLIC OF ROME was inspired directly by Livy's History of the Roman Republic. I had just finished reading the histories and stewing about them for several days. It was clear there was an interesting little game there, but there was a hitch. No political simulation could capture the flavor of Roman politics without some compelling reason for players to put personal interest aside. The trick turned out to be reducing the idea to a solitaire game. Once viewed in this fashion, it became obvious one need only split the single player side into factions and voila! The rest of the rules were pretty easy and only took an afternoon working in my garage to produce a prototype we played that evening.

This is not to suggest the game arrived in its present state that first evening. My only real contribution, I think, was to see the possibilities of using the game itself as one of the players. We played three games that first night. Each game took between an hour and ninety minutes to finish. We lost the first two to wars, but won the third when Marcus White returned from a Macedonian war with a big army and a belligerent attitude. He earned the honor of being the first person to win a game of REPUBLIC OF ROME.

The games went quickly because of a rule that permitted a Consul to make proposals without fear of being penalized for a unanimous vote against the proposal. In this way a Consul could drain his opponent's votes and money with unacceptable proposals before he cashed in with the big Consul for Life proposal. The only thing to fear was that once the groundwork was laid, another faction could jump in with a tribune card and force you to make a Consul for Life proposal with their boy as the beneficiary. We also had no allied armies, no provinces formed by victories, and no historical order for events. One could be sent from Rome as a Governor, but the post was an abstract one.

My focus at this time was the politics of the Senate (in fact we called the game Senate), not the wars or Rome's expansion. There were two rounds of card draws at the beginning of each turn, and state concessions were placed face up in the Forum and distributed politically during the Senate phase. We had fewer war cards in play, but with the large number of cards drawn, it was always possible for bad luck to smash the State quickly.

Students of history know that Livy is very unreliable. His works are not so much a true history, but rather a representation of the myths the Romans used to think of themselves. There was little chance of a popular revolt, and Livy's description of the populace withdrawing to the Sacred Mount is pure fiction. But my point was that this fiction still provided the framework for Senate politics. Sure the revolt was fiction, but who at the time could know it was not a possibility? I suspect the possibility weighed heavily on the early Romans. For the same reasons we did not number the Punic or Macedonian wars. There was no a priori way to know what war would pop up, and I was more interested in the atmosphere of uncertainty than historical truth.

Our gaming group played Senate on and off over about five years, usually as the last game of the evening to fill a short time slot. Players won about half the games, and we considered this about what we wanted.

Then one evening Richard Berthold, our own Professor of Ancient History at the University of New Mexico, suggested we should try to sell it, and volunteered to put the rules in a coherent order. I thought this would be good for a laugh and dumped my STACKS of papers and notebooks crammed with rules and notes on the poor fellow.

Imagine my surprise when a week later Rick said he was done. About this time my wife and I were in the process of moving to Berkeley, California, where my wife had been offered a job as a designer for the University of California Press. Rick thought we ought to start at the top, so he sent the rules off to Avalon Hill. Within a week we got a reply in the form of a letter telling us that Avalon Hill NEVER looks at unsolicited manuscripts and just tosses them in the trash, and, oh, did we think we could send him a prototype to playtest(!)

Apparently on the way to the trash the rules must have fallen out or something, and Mr. Greenwood couldn't help seeing that Senate was a card driven game for which he had a soft spot. Rick whipped up a quick prototype and sent it in for six to eight weeks of playtesting. One week later Don Greenwood sent us a contract.

Now things began to take off. Don's playtesters were getting crushed game after game. My opinion was that the testers weren't quite understanding how to work together, but it was decided that waiting for players to figure out how to play skillfully might mean many players would be quickly turned off by it. That really wasn't my concern, but I understand why a game company might consider this a deal breaker. So rules were added to scale back the lethality of the game. The number of card draws were cut back, and penalties for failed proposals were added.

Next I got a frantic letter saying the testing was on the verge of collapse because players were becoming angry when their opponents failed to complete their side of a public bargain. I was asked to come up with a solution to prevent "fistfights from breaking out". Look, I'll admit I wasn't the guy to ask about this. The mere idea that the testers could become so involved in the game as to make violence a possibility warmed my evil little heart. I suggested the solution might be to hire ADULTS to do the playtesting. As you might imagine, this was not the answer they were looking for, and from this point on, I was out of the development loop.

The rule requiring public agreements to be carried out ([1.04.3](../01-basic-game/1.04-game-terms-and-concepts.md#1.04.3)) was added. As a player of Diplomacy and Junta, I hated it. Oh well, once you create something and turn it loose, it ceases to belong to you.

The next major phase began with a suggestion from Rick that we might want to tie the game more closely to historical events and AH liked the idea. Professor Berthold began to percolate with ideas and it is from this point that the rules which change the rules date. Now early on we had experimented with permitting players to change the rules of the game by votes in the Senate phase, but had discarded them as unworkable. But the experiment had left a residue of silly proposals we still used for color. A player could be required to wear a clown nose while tabulating votes, for instance. But Rick and Don made the idea work. REPUBLIC OF ROME was about to become an historical simulation as well as a political one.

Eventually one has to quit fiddling and publish, and so AH put it into print. REPUBLIC OF ROME won the award at Origin that year for best pre-twentieth century wargame. The following year Descartes Games licensed the rules and put out a beautiful version in French.

I have only played the final game three times. Professor Berthold has played it once. I have watched many games, however, and if you ever played the game online, I have probably seen your play.

Senate was my game when it left my garage, but today many people have had a hand in its development. I have had people ask why, if I was the designer, my name is not more prominently displayed. I must say that it is because I believe that others have contributed more to the game's development over the years than I. She was my baby, but I turned her loose and others have taken the ideas and run with them.

*Robert Haines*
