# 1.01. Introduction

[← I. Basic Game](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

## 1.01 INTRODUCTION {#1.01}

REPUBLIC OF ROME is a game that captures 250 years of political history during the Roman Republic, from its appearance on the world stage around the time of the 1st Punic War (264 BC) through its eventual collapse into civil war with the assassination of Julius Caesar in 44 BC. Players control factions composed of the leading Senatorial families who compete for state offices, military commands, economic concessions and new adherents. Each player is attempting to become the dominant political force in Rome. However, the Senate must also attend to the affairs of state in a hostile world, necessitating a certain amount of cooperation in the prosecution of wars and the maintenance of public contentment. Failure to do so, especially at the outset when Rome is most vulnerable, may result in the collapse of the Republic. Therefore, the players must not only out maneuver one another, but also defeat the game itself, which constitutes an ever-present opponent scheming to divide and defeat them all. Players are advised to keep the threat of the downfall of the Republic foremost in mind and stand ready to cooperate for the good of the state. Otherwise, the most likely winner will be the game, and all players will be put to the sword!

WINNING: There are multiple ways to win REPUBLIC OF ROME. One common way is for the Senators in your Faction to accumulate the most combined Influence by the end of the game. However, if a single Senator can accumulate enough Influence to be elected or appointed Consul for Life, this will usually result in a victory for his Faction. The most difficult and most dramatic way to win is to gain the allegiance of the formidable Roman Legions, Revolt against the State and attempt to take the Senate by force! For more details on Winning Conditions see 1.12.2.

LOSING: Be ever watchful as Rome can fall in a myriad of ways! If the State goes Bankrupt, all players lose. If the citizens of Rome ever Revolt
due to the poor stewardship of the Senate, all the players lose. Finally, if, at the end of any Combat Phase, Rome is beset by four Active Wars, the
Republic will collapse under the strain and Rome will be no more! For more details on the Losing Conditions see 1.12.1. 2
