# 1.06. Revenue Phase {#1.06}

[← I. Basic Game](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

### 1.06.1 PERSONAL REVENUE {#1.06.1}

All Senators generate Personal Revenue unless they are in Revolt ([1.11.33](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.33)), Captive ([1.10.71](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.71)), or non-Aligned \[EXCEPTION: Rebel Governors if using the Rebel Governor ([2.03](../02-advanced-game/2.03-rebel-governors.md#2.03)) Advanced Rules\]. The revenue includes Base Income plus funds from Concessions, Governorships and Knights. These are given as a lump sum to the player for Redistribution ([1.06.3](#1.06.3)).

### 1.06.11 BASE INCOME {#1.06.11}

Each Faction Leader collects 3 Talents and all other Senators collect 1 Talent apiece.

### 1.06.12 KNIGHTS/CONCESSIONS {#1.06.12}

Each Senator collects from the Bank 1 Talent for each Knight on his card, plus he must generate revenue on each Concession ([1.07.32](../01-basic-game/1.07-forum-phase.md#1.07.32)) he controls and reveal the Concession's corrupt bar. Grain Concession bonuses may be taken for Drought even if the Senator's Popularity ([1.07.31](../01-basic-game/1.07-forum-phase.md#1.07.31)) is -9.

### 1.06.13 PROVINCIAL SPOILS {#1.06.13}

Each turn, each non-rebel Governor has the option to roll a die or dice to generate Talents of Provincial Spoils from his Province. A Governor need not pay a negative Provincial Spoils result, but the State must pay for unpaid negative amounts resulting from both Personal and State Income rolls during the Debits step ([1.06.53](#1.06.53)) of the Revenue Phase. A Governor need not collect Provincial Spoils produced by his Province, but must make that decision before rolling to determine the amount. A Governor who attempts to collect Provincial Spoils from his Province takes a Corrupt marker (unless he already has one) and is subject to a possible Minor Prosecution until the end of the first Prosecution Phase after his return to Rome ([1.09.41](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.41)). If using the Provincial Wars Advanced Rule ([2.02.4](../02-advanced-game/2.02-provincial-wars.md#2.02.4)), ALL Provinces listed under Attacks on each Active War provide no Provincial Spoils.

> **EXAMPLE:** The Governor of Undeveloped Hispania Ulterior takes a Corrupt marker and rolls a 2 for Provincial Spoils, which results in net income of -1 (2 - 3 = -1), but he need not pay any negative totals out of his own funds. Total bill to the State Treasury is -1 Talent.

### 1.06.2 REBEL MAINTENANCE {#1.06.2}

Rebel Forces must be maintained at a cost of 2 Talents per Legion and Fleet before the Redistribution of wealth occurs ([1.06.3](#1.06.3)). See ([1.11.35](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.35)) for more details.

### 1.06.3 REDISTRIBUTION {#1.06.3}

All Personal Revenue generated, in addition to any existing Talents, may at this point be moved freely between Personal Treasuries and Faction Treasuries. The exceptions to this rule are that Rebel Senators may not transfer money in their Personal Treasury to or from either non-rebel Senators or any Faction Treasury (but to or from other Rebel Senators is ok), and Captive Senators may not give or receive money at all. Money may be transferred to or from Senators who are not in Rome. Except as noted for Rebels and Captives, players may give Talents from their Faction Treasury and the Personal Treasuries of their own Senators to other players ([1.04.6](../01-basic-game/1.04-game-terms-and-concepts.md#1.04.6)), who may then redistribute the Talents as needed.

### 1.06.31 FACTION TREASURY {#1.06.31}

Talents allocated to the Faction Treasury are placed in the Faction Treasury Box in front of each player. Faction Treasuries are secret and not available for inspection by other players ([1.04.9](../01-basic-game/1.04-game-terms-and-concepts.md#1.04.9)). This is the only money that may be used to defend against another Faction's Persuasion Attempt ([1.07.4](../01-basic-game/1.07-forum-phase.md#1.07.4)). Talents from the Faction Treasury may also be used to maintain Legions and Fleets in the event of a Revolt by a Senator of that Faction ([1.11.35](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.35)) or to Ransom a Captive Senator ([1.10.71](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.71)). Only money in the Faction Treasury is safe from loss due to death. Money in the Faction Treasury may be spent only for the purposes listed in this paragraph.

### 1.06.4 PROVINCE DEVELOPMENT {#1.06.4}

After collecting or declining to collect his Provincial Spoils, the Governor of each Undeveloped (yellow-bordered) Province (unless in Revolt) must roll 1d6 to see if that Province has been improved by Roman control. Rebel Governors do not roll for Province development and provinces without a Governor are not eligible to be Developed. There is a +1 drm to the Improvement roll if the Governor does not hold a Corrupt marker. If the roll is 6, the Province card is flipped to its Developed (green) side. The new values listed thereon remain in effect for the rest of the Game. Provinces being attacked by a Barbarian Raids Event, allied with a War (Advanced Rule 2.02), or under attack by a War (Advanced Rule 2.02) cannot be Developed. The current Governor of a Province when it is Developed gains 3 Influence.

### 1.06.5 STATE REVENUES {#1.06.5}

The players adjust the Treasury markers on the State Treasury track. The State receives 100 Talents Annual Revenue at the start of each Revenue Phase.

### 1.06.51 TAXES {#1.06.51}

If there are any active Provinces, each non-rebel Governor rolls a die or dice as indicated on that Province card after "State Income" to determine the number of Talents paid to the State by his Province. In some cases, this can be a negative amount and results in the Treasury Track markers being reduced. The amount collected is recorded by adjusting the Treasury Track. A Province with a Rebel Governor, without a Governor ([1.09.54](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.54)), or engaged in a Provincial War ([2.02](../02-advanced-game/2.02-provincial-wars.md#2.02)) does not provide taxes to the State.

### 1.06.52 CONTRIBUTIONS {#1.06.52}

Any non-rebel Senator (even those not in Rome) may contribute money to the State Treasury regardless of the level of the Treasury. In doing so, a Senator may gain 1 Influence for 10 Talents, 3 Influence for 25 Talents, or 7 Influence for 50 or more Talents. A Senator may make one such contribution per Revenue Phase. Excess Contributions do not accumulate credit for Influence gains in later turns. Players may wish to determine the State Debits ([1.06.53](#1.06.53)) before making Contributions in order to avoid Bankruptcy.

### 1.06.53 DEBITS {#1.06.53}

After adding the Annual Revenue, Provincial Taxes and any contributions to the State Treasury, subtract 20 Talents for each Active War (including Unprosecuted Wars and Civil Wars) and the costs for any Land Bills in effect. Finally, deduct 2 Talents for maintenance of each existing Legion or Fleet not in rebellion and not in the Garrison of a Rebel Governor ([1.11.32](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.32)). Players cannot eliminate Forces by voluntarily not paying maintenance. \[EXCEPTION: The HRAO may decline to pay the maintenance for Forces released by a Rebel; any of these Forces not maintained must be eliminated ([1.11.35](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.35), [2.03.6](../02-advanced-game/2.03-rebel-governors.md#2.03.6)).\] If unable to pay its obligations at any time in the game, the State is Bankrupt and only the declared Rebel (if there is one) has a chance to win the game ([1.12.2](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.2)); otherwise, all players lose ([1.12.1](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.1)). Forces that cannot be maintained are eliminated. All the players should be advised when the State Treasury drops below 70 Talents due to the danger of Bankruptcy (and immediate loss) due to subsequent Natural Disaster or Evil Omens Event draws.

### 1.06.6 RETURNING GOVERNORS {#1.06.6}

At the end of the Revenue Phase reduce the term dial of non-rebel Governors by 1. When a term dial moves off of "1" return the Governor to Rome and return the Province card to the Forum (along with any Garrison Legions on the Province). Returning Governors who have a Corrupt marker keep it.
