# 1.07. Forum Phase {#1.07}

[← I. Basic Game](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

### 1.07.1 PASSAGE OF TIME {#1.07.1}

Remove any Event cards in the Forum, unless the card specifically states otherwise.

### 1.07.2 INITIATIVE SEQUENCE {#1.07.2}

The HRAO player ([1.09.11](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.11)) must roll 2d6 for Initiative. If he rolls a 7, he must roll 3d6 on the Random Events Table to determine which Event card he has drawn ([1.07.21](#1.07.21)). Otherwise, he draws a card from the Forum deck. If the Forum deck is empty and will not be replaced with another deck (Extended Scenario 3.04), a player must still roll but does not get to draw a card. He may then take any of the following steps in the order listed below:

- Make one Persuasion Attempt ([1.07.4](#1.07.4))
- Make one attempt to attract a Knight or pressure multiple
  Knights ([1.07.5](#1.07.5)).
- Sponsor Games once ([1.07.6](#1.07.6)); and/or
- Appoint a Senator as his Faction Leader ([1.07.7](#1.07.7))

A player need not have a Senator in Rome to take his regular Initiative.

### 1.07.21 EVENTS {#1.07.21}

If the player rolls a 7 as his Initiative roll, he does not draw a card but instead must roll 3d6 on the Random Events Table and place the corresponding light blue Event card from the table in play. If that Event card is already in play, it is flipped to its dark blue side. If the Event card is already flipped to its dark blue side, there are no additional effects unless specified on the Event card. This prevents the drawing of another Forum or Event card by that player. Evil Omens Events do not modify Natural Disaster Event rolls.

### 1.07.22 BIDDING ON INITIATIVES {#1.07.22}

Once the HRAO has completed his Initiative Sequence, the other players in clockwise order complete an Initiative Sequence until all players have completed one Initiative Sequence. Any additional Initiatives needed to bring the total number for that turn to six are publicly auctioned off to the highest bidder (once around clockwise, starting with the HRAO, minimum bid is 1 Talent). Each Initiative is immediately completed by the winner of the bid. This is repeated until there are no remaining Initiatives.

Only those Senators currently in Rome may bid for an extra Initiative with the winning bid coming from a single Personal Treasury. Winning the bid allows the entire Faction to take the Initiative Sequence, not just the winning Senator. The HRAO's Faction takes any Initiatives that are not bid on.

### 1.07.3 CARDS {#1.07.3}

There are two classes of cards. Cards with black text are called Forum cards and must be played face up in the Forum when they are drawn. Cards with red text are called Faction cards and belong to the player who draws them. A Faction card may be held secretly in a player's possession until he chooses to play it in accordance with any restrictions pertaining to that card.

### 1.07.31 SENATORS {#1.07.31}

There are two types of Senator cards: Family cards ([1.07.311](#1.07.311)), which are Forum cards, and Statesmen ([1.07.312](#1.07.312)), which are Faction cards. The number after the "MIL" on the right of the card is the Senator's Military rating, representing his ability as a Commander (general and admiral). The number after the "ORA" is the Oratory rating, representing his political skills and voting power. The number after the "LOY" is his Loyalty rating, measuring the degree of adherence the Senator feels towards the Faction controlling him ([1.07.411](#1.07.411)). The number in the bottom center of the card is his Influence and serves as a fluctuating gauge of his prestige. This rating can be increased during the Game by his public service or reduced by his misdeeds. This number is always positive; a Senator can never have less than 0 Influence. The small number in the upper center of the card is the Senator ID Number, which corresponds to a likenumbered Mortality Chit. Senator cards also contain designated areas to record the Senator's Popularity and Knight markers. If a Senator's Popularity is negative, it is recorded with a black Number marker. Popularity may not go above 9 or below -9.

### 1.07.311 FAMILY SENATORS {#1.07.311}

Family cards are Senator cards with black text and a marble background that represent leading families in the Senate. New Family cards are added to a Faction only through Persuasion Attempts ([1.07.4](#1.07.4)), when Repopulating Rome ([1.09.81](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.81)) and sometimes when playing a related Statesman card ([1.07.312](#1.07.312)). Having a particular Family card means a player has in his Faction the leading member of that family. Should that Senator die, his place is taken by the next leading member of that family who, if not a Faction Leader, leaves the current Faction and goes to the bottom of the Curia. Family cards with an ID# in brackets "[ ]" include a related prominent Statesman that may appear during play.

### 1.07.312 STATESMEN SENATORS {#1.07.312}

Senator cards with an alphanumeric ID, red text and a marble background represent outstanding individual Statesmen with special capabilities. Statesmen can enter play only at Game start ([3.01.9](../03-scenarios/3.01-early-republic.md#3.01.9)) or during the Revolution Phase ([1.11.1](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.1)). A player may not add a Statesman card to his Faction if either of the following conditions exist:

- An opponent controls the Statesman's related (same ID#) Family card \[EXCEPTION: 25A/B or 29A/B, see below\]; or
- A related Statesman with the same ID# is already in play \[EXCEPTION: 25A/B or 29A/B per 1.05.22\]

When a Statesman enters play, if the player already controls the related Family card, place the Statesman on top of it. If the related Family card is in the Forum, move the Family card to the player's Faction and place the Statesman on top of it. If the related Family card is in the Curia or deck, place the Statesman by itself in the player's Faction.

When a Statesman is already in play and its related Family card appears in the Forum (not the Curia), immediately place it beneath the Statesman.

If two Statesmen with the same number are in play legally [25A/B or 29A/B per ([1.05.22](../01-basic-game/1.05-mortality-phase.md#1.05.22))] and the Family card then appears in the Forum (not the Curia), place the Family card under the "A" Statesman of the pair. A player may not play one of these Statesmen if the Family card is in play with a different Faction, unless the other Statesman of the pair is already in play. If one of the pair dies, and the Family card is with the other, move the Family card to the surviving Statesman, even if the dead Statesman was the Faction Leader.

When a Statesman is placed on his Family card, the Statesman takes over any Influence and Popularity ratings on the Family card that are greater than his own and all its Concessions, Governorships, Knights, and other markers. Note that the Statesman's Military, Oratory, and Loyalty ratings which are less than those on the Family card remain equal to the Statesman's printed rating.

Statesmen may use their special abilities even while they are away from Rome. Marius must still be in Rome to attract a Knight.

### 1.07.32 CONCESSIONS {#1.07.32}

Concessions are Faction cards with a picture frame background that represent economic considerations such as collecting taxes or distributing grain. The player who draws it from the deck owns a Concession. He may assign it to one of his Senators at Game start ([3.01.9](../03-scenarios/3.01-early-republic.md#3.01.9)) or during a Revolution Phase ([1.11.1](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.1)) by placing it partially beneath that Senator's card. That Senator must then collect the number of Talents listed on that Concession during the Revenue Phase ([1.06.12](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.12)) or as otherwise indicated on the Concession card. Generating revenue on a Concession reveals the corrupt bar on that Concession's card. This indicates that the Senator is liable to a Minor Prosecution during the next Senate Phase. A Senator loses a Concession only due to his death ([1.05.3](../01-basic-game/1.05-mortality-phase.md#1.05.3)), a successful Minor Prosecution, or due to certain Wars or Natural Disasters. Whenever a Senator dies or is convicted, his Concessions are returned to the Forum, where they can be awarded to another Senator by a proposal ([1.09.61](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.61)).

### 1.07.321 DESTROYED CONCESSIONS {#1.07.321}

If a Concession is destroyed (aka eliminated) (by a War, Leader or Natural Disaster), then it is placed in the Concession space of the Curia and has a chance to be revived at the end of the Forum Phase ([1.07.8](#1.07.8)).

### 1.07.33 WARS {#1.07.33}

War cards are Forum cards with a parchment background representing external threats to Rome. The numbers next to the icons on the right of the card represent its value in combat. The number next to the Swords icon is the enemy's Land Strength, which represents the value of his army. The number next to the Anchor icon is the Fleet Support number, which indicates the number of Roman Fleets, if any, required to support the War. Some War cards have a number next to a Ship icon, which represents enemy Fleet Strength which must be defeated in a Naval Battle before conducting the Land Battle. The numbers highlighted black and gray next to the D and S on the right of the card determine Disasters and Standoffs and are explained in the Combat section ([1.10.21](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.21), [1.10.31](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.31)). The number inside the Coin on the bottom right indicates the Spoils of War that are generated upon defeat of the War and are detailed in the Combat section ([1.10.4](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.4)). Some Wars have a Dying Plant icon, which indicates the War causes a Drought Effect ([1.08.12](../01-basic-game/1.08-population-phase.md#1.08.12)). Some cards have an Armaments icon beside the date, which indicates whether the War is Active or Inactive ([1.07.331](#1.07.331)) when it is drawn. When a War card with an Armaments icon is drawn, it goes into one of the "Active Wars" spaces in the Forum \[EXCEPTION: Imminent Wars ([1.07.3321](#1.07.3321))\]. It usually remains active until the Senate defeats it.

### 1.07.331 INACTIVE WARS {#1.07.331}

War cards without an Armaments icon are Inactive Wars. When drawn, place them in the "Inactive Wars" spaces of the Forum \[EXCEPTION: Imminent Wars ([1.07.3321](#1.07.3321))\]. They remain inactive in the Forum until the Senate sends an Army or Fleet to attack them, or until activated by their Leader ([1.07.341](#1.07.341)) or a Matching War ([1.07.3321](#1.07.3321)). Once activated, change the War's status by moving it to one of the "Active Wars" spaces of the Forum. Some War cards list how many Matching Wars activate them and where they reside within their sequence of Matching Wars.

### 1.07.332 MATCHING WARS {#1.07.332}

Whenever two Wars of the same type are active (e.g., two Punic Wars or two Cilician Pirates), the Land and Fleet Strength (but not Fleet Support) of each are doubled as long as the two remain active. If a third Matching War is active, the Strength numbers of all three are tripled. If all four Macedonian War cards are active at the same time, their Strength is quadrupled. However, each War is fought individually - not added to its related Wars. In these situations, the Strength numbers of the remaining related Wars are reduced again to tripled, doubled, or normal Strength as their Matching Wars are individually vanquished. When counting Active Wars, each Matching War card (not set) is considered to be a separate War. Rome may not attack the latter of any currently active Matching Wars unless she first (or simultaneously) prosecutes (or ends via New Alliance) all earlier (in Matching War Sequence) currently active and related Matching Wars.

> **EXAMPLE:** Assume the 1st and 2nd Punic Wars are in the Forum. Rome need not defeat the 1st Punic War in order to attack the 2nd, but she must attack the 1st Punic War in the same turn she attacks the 2nd Punic War.

Each Matching War contains a line of text similar to "1st of 2 Cilician Pirates (1)". The number in () is the number of Wars of that type in the Era of the card (i.e., in the Early, Middle, or Late Republic deck).

### 1.07.3321 IMMINENT WARS {#1.07.3321}

Whenever a War card is drawn from the deck that would match another War card that is already located anywhere in the Forum, the drawn card is placed in the "Imminent Wars" Forum space for the remainder of the current turn, and it does not multiply any Active Wars until it, itself, becomes Active. If multiple Matching Wars become Active at the same time (e.g., Spanish Revolts), the earliest one (e.g., 1st before 2nd) becomes Active; the rest become Imminent. If the already existing War in the Forum is currently located in an Inactive War space, it is immediately moved to the Active Wars space; otherwise, nothing else happens. At the beginning of each new turn, before any other action is taken, all cards in the Imminent War space are examined, and one card from each set of Matching Wars is moved to an Active War space on the Forum ([1.05.1](../01-basic-game/1.05-mortality-phase.md#1.05.1)). Activate all Imminent Wars in Matching War order (e.g., 1st Macedonian before 2nd Macedonian), even if it means the most recently drawn War card must be activated. Imminent Wars can be attacked by the Senate (just as if they were Inactive); however, the moment the Senate sends a Force to attack the Imminent War, it is instantly moved to the Active War column and begins to multiply War Strengths. Once played in the Imminent Wars space the War will only be moved out of that box at the beginning of a turn or if attacked by the Senate; Leaders ([1.07.34](#1.07.34)) do not activate Imminent Wars. For the brief period the Wars are located in the Imminent Wars space they are considered Inactive, regardless of their Armaments icon.

> **EXAMPLE:** First Punic War begins the turn in an Inactive War slot. Third Punic War is drawn; it is placed in the Imminent War space, and the 1st Punic War is moved to an Active War space. The 2nd Punic War is drawn in the same turn; it is also placed in the Imminent War space. The Hannibal Leader card is then drawn; it is immediately placed with the active 1st Punic War. At the start of Turn 2, the 2nd Punic War is moved to an Active War space, but the 3rd Punic War remains Inactive until the start of Turn 3.

### 1.07.333 REVOLTS {#1.07.333}

A Revolt is a type of War card in which no Spoils of War are created by defeating the War. Many Revolts are conditional (i.e., they are treated as Revolts if a named Province currently exists at the time of being drawn, but are treated as Wars that are not Revolts if it does not). Whenever the last War in a numbered series of Matching Wars is defeated, any previous War in that series is thereafter treated as a Revolt.

### 1.07.334 WAR CONSEQUENCES {#1.07.334}

A War need not be fought immediately, but for each Active War during the Revenue Phase, the State loses 20 Talents ([1.06.53](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.53)). Some Wars create Drought Effects, threaten Concessions, or attack Provinces. Each War in one of the "Unprosecuted War" spaces ([1.10.9](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.9)) increases Unrest by 1 during every Population Phase ([1.08.11](../01-basic-game/1.08-population-phase.md#1.08.11)). If, at the end of any Combat Phase, there are 4 Active Wars, the Republic collapses and all players lose the Game ([1.12.1](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.1)). Inactive or Imminent Wars do not count against the four-war limit, the State Treasury drain, or Unrest.

### 1.07.34 LEADERS {#1.07.34}

Leader cards are Forum cards with a parchment background representing the appearance of a particularly able enemy Commander. Their presence makes a War more difficult to prosecute.

### 1.07.341 LEADER ACTIVATION {#1.07.341}

If, while an Inactive or Active War is in play, a matching Leader card is drawn (e.g., Hannibal is drawn while any Punic Wars are Active or Inactive), the Leader is immediately placed with the War and the War is considered Active \[EXCEPTION:\*\* Leaders cannot activate Imminent Wars ([1.07.3321](#1.07.3321))\]. If a Leader resides in the Curia and a War matching that Leader is drawn (or becomes Active), both the Leader and the War are immediately considered Active, even if the War would normally be considered Inactive.

### 1.07.342 LEADER STRENGTH {#1.07.342}

While a Leader is active and matched with the War(s), the Land and Fleet Strength (not Fleet Support) number(s) of the War(s) are increased by his value, after any relevant doubling, tripling, or quadrupling for Matching Wars.

### 1.07.343 ADDITIONAL LEADER PENALTIES {#1.07.343}

The numbers on the right side of the Leader card determine automatic Roman Disasters and Standoffs ([1.10.21](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.21), [1.10.31](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.31)) directly attributable to the skill of the Leader and in addition to those in effect for the War itself. Statesmen with "Nullifies Disaster / Standoff" abilities only void the D/S associated with the Wars, not those of associated Leaders.

### 1.07.344 LEADER DEATH {#1.07.344}

If the last active Matching War associated with a Leader is defeated, or a Leader is drawn when none of his Matching Wars are currently in play, the Leader is moved to the Curia. If all of the Matching Wars associated with the Leader are removed from the deck and board the Leader is removed from play. At the end of each Forum Phase, an Aging roll on 1d6 must be made for each Leader in the Curia. If the result is a 5 or 6, that Leader dies and is removed from play. On the Refuge / Rise from Refuge Event "killed by a Victory" refers to a Leader who was aiding a War card and was either removed from play or moved to the Curia due to a Victory result ([1.10.4](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.4)), the Enemy Leader Dies / Enemy Leader Sues for Peace Event, or the New Alliance / Another New Alliance Event. A Leader in Refuge still aids his normal Matching Wars.

### 1.07.35 INTRIGUE {#1.07.35}

Intrigue cards are Faction cards with a picture frame background that have various uses and requirements on when and how they can be played.

### 1.07.36 LAWS {#1.07.36}

Law cards are Faction cards on a scroll background that represent changes in the rules governing the Republic and play of the Game. Display played Law cards in the Law space rather than mixing them with the discards. Law cards may be played anytime during the Senate Phase ([1.09](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09), [2.06](../02-advanced-game/2.06-passing-laws.md#2.06)) even before the Consuls are elected. A player need not have a Senator present in Rome to play a Law card.

### 1.07.37 EVENTS {#1.07.37}

A few Event cards are Forum cards on a picture frame with parchment background. They are resolved immediately and in the same manner as the blue-bordered Event deck. They are discarded after being fully resolved.

### 1.07.4 PERSUASION ATTEMPTS {#1.07.4}

A Senator in Rome may attempt to persuade an Unaligned Senator in the Forum or an already Aligned non-Faction Leader Senator also in Rome to join his own Faction.

### 1.07.41 RESOLUTION {#1.07.41}

The Senator making the Persuasion Attempt adds his Oratory and Influence and subtracts from this sum the target Senator's Loyalty rating to get a Base Number. This Base Number can be modified by Conditions ([1.07.411](#1.07.411)), Bribes ([1.07.412](#1.07.412)) and Counter-Bribes ([1.07.413](#1.07.413)). After Bidding ([1.07.414](#1.07.414)), compare the resulting Base Number to a 2d6 roll. If the roll is less than or equal to the Base Number, the Persuasion Attempt succeeds and the target Senator joins the Faction of the Senator making the Persuasion Attempt. If the original (unmodified) roll is greater than or equal to 10 (or 9 after the "Era Ends" card is revealed), or the modified roll is greater than the Base Number, the Persuasion Attempt fails and the target Senator remains either Unaligned in the Forum or Aligned to his current Faction.

### 1.07.411 CONDITIONS {#1.07.411}

If the target Senator is already Aligned (i.e., in a Faction), subtract 7 from the Base Number. The number of Talents in the Personal Treasury of the target Senator, whether Aligned or not, is also subtracted from the Base Number.

Some Statesmen oppose others and display a "-" followed by another Statesman's name. If a Statesman belongs to the same Faction as any Statesmen shown with a "-" on his card, his printed base Loyalty rating is reduced to 0; however, he still subtracts 7 if he is Aligned. Some Statesmen oppose others who do not oppose them back. The exception is the Gracchi brothers (25A/B), who have a "+" next to their names because both desire to belong to the same Faction. In this case the Loyalty of 0 occurs when the other brother is in the Faction of the Senator making the Persuasion Attempt. This effect only occurs when both 25A and 25B are in play (otherwise their Loyalty is 6).

### 1.07.412 BRIBES {#1.07.412}

The Senator making the Persuasion Attempt may spend money from his Personal Treasury to aid the Persuasion Attempt. Each Talent spent adds 1 to the Base Number. This money is paid into the Personal Treasury of the target Senator at the end of the Attempt, regardless of the outcome.

### 1.07.413 COUNTER-BRIBES {#1.07.413}

All players may interfere in a Persuasion Attempt made against a Senator by spending money from their Faction Treasuries to resist (not aid) the Persuasion Attempt. Each Talent thus spent subtracts 1 from the Base Number. This money is paid into the Personal Treasury of the target Senator at the end of the Attempt, regardless of the outcome. If an Unopposed Persuasion Attempt is made (which requires a Seduction or Blackmail card), this type of interference is not allowed and the target Senator must defend strictly with his Loyalty rating and Personal Treasury.

### 1.07.414 BIDDING {#1.07.414}

The Senator making the Persuasion Attempt announces his target and the initial Base Number, which may already reflect money irrevocably spent from his Personal Treasury. Play then moves clockwise around the table, and each player in turn announces the Talents, if any, he is irrevocably spending from his Faction Treasury to resist the Persuasion Attempt. The player making the Persuasion Attempt may then either roll 2d6 at the present Base Number or irrevocably spend more Talents, with bidding moving around the table again. This cycle of bidding continues until all players stop spending money or the Persuader accepts the current Base Number. Money thus spent should be initially placed on the table in front of a player's Faction (making change as necessary) and transferred to the target Senator's card only after the Persuasion Attempt is resolved.

> **EXAMPLE:**: Fabius wishes to make a Persuasion Attempt against Claudius, who is an Unaligned Senator in the Forum. Fabius adds his Oratory and Influence ratings and gets a sum of 7, from which he subtracts Claudius' Loyalty rating of 7 to produce a Base Number of 0. Fabius spends 9 Talents from his Personal Treasury to bring the Base Number up to 9. Play then moves around the table, and the other players spend a total of 8 Talents from their collective Faction Treasuries to lower the Base Number to 1. Fabius responds by spending the 7 Talents remaining in his Personal Treasury to raise the Base Number to 8. Play revolves around the table again, but this time the other players are unwilling or unable to spend any more money, so the final Base Number is 8. Fabius rolls a 9, which is not less than or equal to 8, so the Persuasion Attempt fails and Claudius remains uncommitted in the Forum. All the money spent on the Persuasion Attempt is placed in Claudius' Personal Treasury, making him both more attractive and harder to get, since the 24 Talents now in his Personal Treasury are automatically added to his Loyalty rating in any future Persuasion Attempts.

### 1.07.5 KNIGHTS {#1.07.5}

A player may attempt to attract one Knight per Initiative to one of his Aligned Senators in Rome by paying 0 or more Talents from that Senator's Personal Treasury and then rolling a die. If the sum of the die roll and the number of Talents paid is greater than or equal to 6, a Knight is attracted and that Senator places a Knight marker on his card indicating the total number of Knights he controls. There is no limit to the number of Knights that may eventually be controlled by a Senator. For each Knight a Senator controls he gains an extra vote in the Senate and an extra Talent of income during the Revenue Phase unless the Senator is held Captive. A Senator in Revolt ([1.11.33](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.33)) or who dies loses control of all of his Knights.

### 1.07.51 PRESSURING KNIGHTS {#1.07.51}

Instead of rolling to attract a Knight, a player may opt to pressure any Knights he has in his Faction for contributions and, in so doing, loses their support. He announces how many of his Knights under each of his Senators he will pressure and rolls a die for each to determine the amount of Talents gained. This money must be added to each controlling Senator's respective Personal Treasury and the pressured Knights are returned to the Bank. Pressured Knights no longer provide extra income or extra votes.

### 1.07.6 SPONSORING GAMES {#1.07.6}

Sponsoring Games allows one Senator to increase his Popularity while lowering the Unrest Level of the populace. The Senator pays the cost of the games he wishes to Sponsor from his Personal Treasury (see the Games Table). Adjust his Popularity and reduce the Unrest Level as indicated. The Senator does not need to be in Rome to Sponsor Games.

### 1.07.7 APPOINT NEW FACTION LEADER {#1.07.7}

A player may change his Faction Leader by placing his Faction Leader marker on any Senator in his Faction. The new Faction Leader does not need to be in Rome.

### 1.07.8 PUTTING ROME IN ORDER {#1.07.8}

After all six Initiatives have been resolved, complete the following steps.

1. All Senators (in Rome or not) that currently hold a Major Office get a "major" marker, which indicates they are available for a Major Prosecution this turn.
2. The HRAO rolls to see which Tax Farmer Concessions are destroyed if the 2nd Punic War or Gladiator Slave Revolts are active (Evil Omens Events do not modify these rolls). Make rolls for Hannibal / Spartacus only if 2nd Punic War / any Gladiator Revolt is active. These may be immediately rolled for revival in the next step.
3. The HRAO then rolls a die for each Concession and Senator in the Curia (even if destroyed or killed that turn). If he rolls a 5 or 6 that card is revived and placed face up in the Forum. He also rolls for each Leader in the Curia and discards it on a die roll of 5 or 6.
