# 1.08. Population Phase {#1.08}

[← I. Basic Game](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

### 1.08.1 UNREST {#1.08.1}

The Unrest Level represents the degree of dissatisfaction of the populace with the government. The Unrest Level starts at 0. There is no limit to how high the Unrest Level can go, but it can never go lower than 0. To show an Unrest Level higher than 9, flip the Unrest Level marker over. At the beginning of the Population Phase, the Unrest Level is adjusted for the following conditions:

### 1.08.11 UNPROSECUTED WARS {#1.08.11}

Each Unprosecuted War ([1.10.9](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.9)) adds 1 to the Unrest Level.

### 1.08.12 DROUGHT EFFECTS {#1.08.12}

The Unrest Level is increased by 1 for each separate Drought Effect in play. Drought Effects can be caused by both Events and Wars. Each Drought Effect is cumulative and adds 1 to the Unrest before the State of the Republic speech is made ([1.08.2](#1.08.2)). Drought markers can be used to keep track of the number of Drought Effects in play.

> **EXAMPLE:** A War with a Drought Effect is in play and Unprosecuted. The Drought Event is rolled twice in the Forum Phase. The total modifier to the Unrest would be +4 (+1 for the Unprosecuted War and 3 for 3 Drought Effects - the initial Drought Effect on the War plus the 2 additional Drought Events rolled).

### 1.08.2 STATE OF THE REPUBLIC {#1.08.2}

The HRAO gives a State of the Republic speech by rolling 3d6, subtracting the Unrest Level, and adding his Popularity. The result is found on the Population Table. The numbers on the Population Table indicate the amount the Unrest Level is to be immediately increased or decreased. A result of "NR" (No Recruitment) places the No Recruitment marker onto the Force Pool, prohibiting the raising of any Forces for the rest of the turn. \[EXCEPTION: Neither No Recruitment nor Manpower Shortage applies to Legions/Fleets recruited via the Gabinian Law card.\] "MS" places the Manpower Shortage Event card into the Forum, places the Manpower Shortage marker onto the Force Pool, and is cumulative with any existing Manpower Shortage ([1.07.21](../01-basic-game/1.07-forum-phase.md#1.07.21)). "Mob" results in an assault on the Senate by an outraged mob, which is resolved by drawing six Mortality Chits to check among those currently in Rome to determine the Senators killed ([1.05.21](../01-basic-game/1.05-mortality-phase.md#1.05.21)). "People Revolt" results in an overthrow of the Senatorial government and immediate defeat for all players ([1.12.1](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.1)), unless a Rebel is currently in Revolt, in which case he wins [barring loss due to four Wars] ([1.12.2](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.2)).
