# 1.09. Senate Phase

[← I. Basic Game](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

## 1.09 SENATE PHASE {#1.09}

### 1.09.1 HOW THE SENATE PHASE WORKS {#1.09.1}

The Senate Phase is the heart of the Game. Players will put forward a variety of proposals which will then be voted on by Senators and enacted if passed. The Senate Phase begins as soon as the results of the State of the Republic speech are implemented.

> **REMEMBER:** Each player should readjust his Vote Tally dial as soon as he gains or loses votes for any reason.

### 1.09.11 HIGHEST RANKING AVAILABLE OFFICIAL (HRAO) {#1.09.11}

The HRAO is the highest ranking available official in Rome. The order of precedence is listed on their Major Office Marker:

1. Dictator,
2. Rome Consul,
3. Field Consul,
4. Censor,
5. Master of Horse,
6. Pontifex Maximus ([2.01](../02-advanced-game/2.01-pontifex-maximus.md#2.01)).

If none of these officials is alive and in Rome, then Aligned Senators in Rome are eligible to become the HRAO (and/or Presiding Magistrate, [1.09.12](#1.09.12), [1.09.144](#1.09.144)) from most to least Influence (using Oratory and then lowest ID# to break ties). All Senators in Rome [i.e., everyone except Governors ([1.09.5](#1.09.5)), Proconsuls ([1.10.8](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.8)), Captives ([1.10.71](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.71)) and Rebel Senators ([1.11.3](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.3))] must attend the Senate meeting.

### 1.09.12 PRESIDING MAGISTRATE {#1.09.12}

The HRAO is typically the Presiding Magistrate. The HRAO will not be the Presiding Magistrate during Prosecutions ([1.09.41](#1.09.41)) or after stepping down as a result of a unanimous proposal defeat ([1.09.144](#1.09.144)). The Presiding Magistrate has complete control over the procedures of the Senate and conducts all business. He may recognize Senators in any order he wishes and may call for the votes of each Faction in any order. He alone makes nominations and proposals without the use of a Tribune card ([1.09.151](#1.09.151)), and he may break off discussion on any proposal by calling for an immediate vote. Any player who ignores his demand for an immediate vote is considered to have abstained and loses his right to vote on that proposal. After all elections (including Governors) and Prosecutions, he may close the meeting at any time there is no unresolved proposal on the floor by saying "the Senate is adjourned." If the Presiding Magistrate is killed, the next HRAO becomes Presiding Magistrate.

### 1.09.13 PROPOSALS {#1.09.13}

A proposal is anything put before the Senate for a vote (except a Prosecution, see 1.09.41), either by the Presiding Magistrate, a Tribune, or as otherwise allowed. A nomination is a type of proposal. Whenever a vote is not in progress, any player may offer advice, discuss options, and/or suggest courses of action, but only the Presiding Magistrate or a Tribune can formally define a proposal (i.e., place the proposal "on the floor"). Only the Presiding Magistrate may call for votes.

### 1.09.131 PROPOSAL ALTERATION {#1.09.131}

Defeated proposals may not be introduced again in the same Senate Phase without significant change.

> **EXAMPLES:**
>
> - A proposal to assign Fabius 8 Legions fails. A subsequent proposal to assign Fabius 7 Legions or Claudius 8 Legions may be put forward.
> - A proposal to send Fabius to govern Hispania Citerior and Claudius to Sicilia might fail as a joint proposal but a subsequent separate proposal to send Fabius to Hispania Citerior is legal.
> - A proposal to nominate Fabius and Claudius as Consuls fails. A Subsequent proposal to nominate Claudius and Fabius as Consuls would be illegal (rewording the proposal is not enough).

In contrast, Concessions ([1.09.61](#1.09.61)) and Consul for Life nominations ([1.09.82](#1.09.82)) can be voted upon only once per turn.

### 1.09.14 VOTING {#1.09.14}

After announcing the proposal, the Presiding Magistrate calls on a Faction to vote first. That Faction must vote, abstain, or use a Tribune to veto the vote ([1.09.151](#1.09.151), [1.09.152](#1.09.152)) without delay ([1.09.12](#1.09.12)). After that Faction votes or abstains, the Presiding Magistrate calls on another Faction to vote, and the process is repeated until all Factions have had an opportunity to vote, abstain, or the proposal is vetoed. The voting procedure of the Senate is the same for all business requiring a vote except that abstaining is not allowed during the passage or repeal of a Land Bill ([1.09.62](#1.09.62)); any player refusing to vote on a Land Bill when prompted is considered to have voted against it (or for its repeal).

### 1.09.141 VOTES {#1.09.141}

Each Senator in Rome controls votes equal to his Oratory plus the number of Knights he controls. However, he may temporarily increase his votes for any particular proposal or Prosecution ([1.09.41](#1.09.41)) by buying them. For each Talent he pays out of his Personal Treasury he receives 1 extra vote for that round of voting. These Talents are paid out when the Senator's votes are called upon.

### 1.09.142 BLOCK VOTES {#1.09.142}

All the Senators in a Faction need not vote alike, though they usually will. Once a player declares his vote, he may not change it, nor play a Tribune to veto (cancel) the vote.

### 1.09.143 PASSAGE {#1.09.143}

A simple majority (> 50%) of votes cast is required to pass any measure (i.e., a proposal, Prosecution ([1.09.41](#1.09.41)), or anything else requiring a vote), except recalling a Pontifex Maximus.

### 1.09.144 LOSS OF INFLUENCE {#1.09.144}

Whenever the Presiding Magistrate makes a proposal which is defeated by unanimous vote of all Senators in Rome controlled by the other players, he may choose to lose 1 Influence (down to a minimum of 0) or he may step down as Presiding Magistrate and immediately hand over conduct of the meeting to the next HRAO. If the Presiding Magistrate does not have any Influence to lose, he must step down as Presiding Magistrate. The Senator stepping down retains his office, but is not available to be the Presiding Magistrate at any further point in the turn. This does not affect the HRAO order, just who is the Presiding Magistrate. This can happen multiple times during a Senate Phase. These penalties do not apply when a Tribune is used to put forth a proposal ([1.09.151](#1.09.151)).

### 1.09.15 TRIBUNES {#1.09.15}

Tribune cards may be played during the Senate Phase to veto or initiate proposals, including nominations. Once used, Tribunes are discarded. If two or more players play a Tribune at the same time, those players dice off to determine who gets precedence with the loser(s) taking their Tribune(s) back to their hand(s). Players may play Tribune cards even if they have no Senators in Rome.

### 1.09.151 PROPOSAL USING A TRIBUNE {#1.09.151}

Players may force proposals to a vote by using a Tribune card and announcing "Tribune!". A proposal is considered on the floor the moment the player who played the Tribune defines the proposal. The Presiding Magistrate must call for the votes of each Faction and can do so in any order. The proposal must still be made at the correct time in the Senate Phase (e.g., a player may not propose to recruit Legions before the Censor has been elected). This may be done any time there is no proposal already on the floor. Alternatively, it can be played during a current proposal with or without specifying intent so as to establish that player's right to make the next proposal. Other facts about Tribunes:

- A Tribune may not be used to interrupt an already played Tribune (i.e., once a Tribune has been played to make a proposal, another Tribune may not interrupt it).
- A Prosecution is not considered a proposal and is therefore not eligible to be proposed (though they may be vetoed).
- A Tribune can also be played immediately after the Presiding Magistrate adjourns the Senate to force its continuation to consider the Tribune's proposal.
- A Tribune may not be used to make a proposal to adjourn the Senate; however, a proposal could be put forth to send the Presiding Magistrate to war, which, if it passes, would close the Senate upon the Presiding Magistrate's departure ([1.09.642](#1.09.642)).
- A Tribune can be used in the middle of a vote that would send the Presiding Magistrate off to war (thus closing the Senate Phase) before or during his turn to vote - not as a veto, but as a measure to suspend the vote until after his proposal has been acted upon. ([1.09.642](#1.09.642))
- Some Statesmen have the capability of playing an inherent Tribune each turn without actually playing a card. Treat this ability exactly the same as if the player had played a Tribune card.

### 1.09.152 VETO USING A TRIBUNE {#1.09.152}

A Tribune may be used prior to or during (but not after) the owning Faction's turn to vote to stop any vote from being taken [EXCEPTIONS: Consul for Life, Special Prosecution of Assassins, any proposal by a Dictator, and the appointment of the last eligible candidate for any office]. The player playing the Tribune announces "Veto" and the vote is cancelled, even if it already had enough votes for passage. The slate of candidates in a vetoed election may not be nominated again in the same turn, nor may the Accused in a vetoed Prosecution be prosecuted again that turn for the same reason.

### 1.09.16 PROPOSAL IMPLEMENTATION TIMING {#1.09.16}

A proposal is implemented as soon as the last Faction votes on it and the proposal passes. No cards can be played or actions occur between the time the last Faction votes and the proposal is implemented.

> **EXAMPLE:** A Senator could not be Assassinated after he is elected Governor since he is considered to be in his Province as soon as the last vote on the passing proposal is cast.

### 1.09.17 PROHIBITIONS {#1.09.17}

The Senate may not put forth a proposal or nomination not defined within the rules.

### 1.09.171 RESIGN {#1.09.171}

A Senator elected to an office may not resign it.

### 1.09.172 DECLINE A NOMINATION {#1.09.172}

A Senator may not decline a nomination; however, he may vote against or veto the proposal.

### 1.09.173 RE-FILL AN OFFICE {#1.09.173}

If an office has been filled in a turn via election or appointment, no other election or appointment for that office can happen in the same turn, even if the office holder dies.

### 1.09.18 OFFICE INFLUENCE {#1.09.18}

Influence gained from an office is not lost when the Senator ceases to hold the office, but is his to keep until lost by some form of misdeed (i.e., Prosecution) or death. \[EXCEPTION: Pontifex Maximus Advanced Rule ([2.01](../02-advanced-game/2.01-pontifex-maximus.md#2.01))\]

### 1.09.2 CONSULS {#1.09.2}

The first act of any Presiding Magistrate must be to conduct elections for new Consuls from among the ranks of Aligned Senators in Rome. He must nominate candidates in pairs. Any pair of candidates that is defeated may not be nominated again that turn as the same pair, but the individuals making up the defeated pair may be nominated again as part of a different pair. Candidates are elected or defeated as a pair; one cannot be elected while the other is defeated in the same vote. The current Consuls and Dictator (if any) may not be elected Consul this turn until the Tradition Erodes Law is passed (but may become Dictator, 1.09.3). A Senator may not hold two Major Offices simultaneously, but the current Censor or Master of Horse may be elected Consul with the understanding that he will not continue to serve in his existing office.

### 1.09.21 AUTOMATIC APPOINTMENT {#1.09.21}

Nominations continue until two Consuls are elected or until only one possible pair of candidates remains, in which case this final pair is automatically appointed.

### 1.09.22 ROME/FIELD CONSUL {#1.09.22}

The newly elected Consuls decide amongst themselves who will be Rome Consul. If they cannot agree, they dice off for the choice of office. Place the appropriate Consul markers on their respective cards and immediately increase their Influence by 5. The new Rome Consul becomes Presiding Magistrate and takes over conduct of the meeting. The outgoing Consuls receive Prior Consul markers (unless they already have one). Upon the election of the Consuls, if a Dictator or Master of the Horse exist, they lose that office, and the Dictator gains a Prior Consul marker.

### 1.09.3 DICTATOR {#1.09.3}

If and only if Rome is facing 3 or more Active Wars, or one Active War with a combined Land and Fleet Strength of at least 20, which could be a Civil War ([1.11.3](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.3)), a Dictator may be elected or appointed immediately after the Consular elections. A Naval Victory marker reduces the Naval Strength of a War to 0 for this purpose. To be eligible for Dictator, a Senator must be Aligned, in Rome, and not holding any Major Office except Censor.

### 1.09.31 AUTOMATIC APPOINTMENT {#1.09.31}

The Consuls, acting together, may appoint any eligible Senator on whom they can agree as Dictator. If there is only one Consul present because the other has been killed, he may act alone to appoint a Dictator. This appointment may not be vetoed with a Tribune.

### 1.09.32 DICTATOR ELECTION {#1.09.32}

If the Consuls cannot agree to appoint a Dictator, the Senate may immediately elect a Dictator if the Presiding Magistrate calls for such elections (which may be vetoed). A Dictator may also be proposed via the use of a Tribune at this time (after the Consuls decline to make a joint appointment). The Presiding Magistrate, or anyone with a Tribune, may continue to try to elect a Dictator even after multiple failures; however, once a Censor is elected or appointed ([1.09.4](#1.09.4)) a Dictator nomination may no longer be put forth (even with a Tribune).

### 1.09.33 TERM {#1.09.33}

The new Dictator becomes Presiding Magistrate, takes the Dictator marker, increases his Influence by 7, and appoints as his Master of Horse any Aligned Senator in Rome not already holding a Major Office (except Censor). That Senator takes the Master of Horse marker and increases his Influence by 3. The Dictator's proposals cannot be vetoed, though all proposals must still be voted upon normally. The terms of the Dictator and his Master of Horse last until the end of the Consular elections of the next turn, at which time both the Dictator and his Master of Horse must immediately surrender those offices and the Dictator (not the Master of Horse) takes a Prior Consul marker. The Dictator (or another Senator) may be immediately appointed/elected Dictator again, assuming the War requirements are met ([1.09.3](#1.09.3)).

### 1.09.34 MASTER OF HORSE {#1.09.34}

Whenever the Dictator commands a Force, he is accompanied by his Master of Horse. The Dictator's Military rating for any combat is the sum of his Military rating and that of his Master of Horse. The Master of Horse must accompany the Dictator to War. The Master of Horse must remain in the same place as the Dictator (unless the Master of Horse is a Captive) until the Dictator dies, is captured ([1.10.7](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.7)), becomes a Proconsul ([1.10.8](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.8)), or Revolts ([1.11.3](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.3)). If victorious in a War, the Dictator receives the usual increase in his Influence and Popularity ([1.10.4](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.4)), while the Master of Horse gets nothing. If the Dictator is defeated, the Master of Horse is killed along with him. The Master of Horse can also be killed or captured by a Mortality Chit draw. If the Dictator dies (at any time) or is captured, and the Master of Horse survives and is not a Captive, the Master of Horse returns to Rome (if away) and keeps his Master of Horse office. If the Master of Horse dies (at any time) or is captured, the Dictator may not appoint another until he is re-elected or re-appointed as Dictator. The Master of Horse cannot nullify a Disaster or Standoff result in any battle.

### 1.09.4 CENSOR {#1.09.4}

Immediately after the election of the new Consuls and the option to appoint or elect a Dictator, the Presiding Magistrate conducts elections for Censor. Eligible candidates for Censor must have a Prior Consul marker, must be an Aligned Senator in Rome, and must not hold an existing Major Office except for Censor. If only one eligible candidate of Consular experience is available (as usually happens on the first turn), he is appointed automatically. If there are no Senators with Consular experience present in the Senate and free of other Major Offices, the election for Censor is temporarily thrown open to all Aligned Senators in Rome. Each time a Censor is elected or appointed, the Censor marker is placed on that Senator's card and his Influence increases by 5. The Presiding Magistrate now turns the conduct of the meeting over to the Censor to conduct any Prosecutions ([1.09.41](#1.09.41)).

### 1.09.41 PROSECUTIONS {#1.09.41}

The Censor either declares no Prosecutions, ensures Major/Corrupt markers are removed ([1.09.45](#1.09.45)), and returns conduct of the meeting to the Presiding Magistrate or declares a Prosecution. He may conduct up to two Minor or one Major Prosecution each turn in addition to any Special Major Prosecutions of Assassins. During Prosecutions the Censor is the Presiding Magistrate and conducts all voting. If he suffers a unanimous defeat, he may either lose the required Influence ([1.09.144](#1.09.144)) or hand control of the meeting back to the previous Presiding Magistrate and end all Prosecutions. A Censor may not Prosecute himself \[EXCEPTION: Special Major Prosecutions of Assassins ([1.09.74](#1.09.74))\]. Only Senators in Rome may be Prosecuted. If the Censor dies while the Prosecutions are ongoing, all unresolved Prosecutions fail and the meeting returns to the Presiding Magistrate.

### 1.09.411 PROSECUTOR {#1.09.411}

The Censor must appoint a consenting Senator to be Prosecutor for each Prosecution [Exception: Prosecutors are not appointed for Special Major Prosecutions of Assassins]. The Prosecutor can be any Senator in Rome, provided he is neither the Censor himself nor the Accused. If no consenting Prosecutor can be found then there can be no Prosecution(s).

### 1.09.412 ELIGIBILITY FOR MINOR PROSECUTIONS {#1.09.412}

A Senator with a Corrupt marker ([1.06.13](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.13)), a Major marker ([1.07.8](../01-basic-game/1.07-forum-phase.md#1.07.8)), or a Concession with a revealed corrupt bar ([1.06.12](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.12), [1.09.631](#1.09.631)) is eligible for a Minor Prosecution.

### 1.09.413 ELIGIBILITY FOR MAJOR PROSECUTIONS {#1.09.413}

To be eligible for a Major Prosecution the Accused must hold a Major marker ([1.07.8](../01-basic-game/1.07-forum-phase.md#1.07.8)), which means that the Senator held a Major Office last turn.

### 1.09.42 TRIAL {#1.09.42}

The Censor calls for votes. Voting **for** the Prosecution (i.e., Guilty) is a vote for conviction. Voting **against** the Prosecution (i.e., Not Guilty) is a vote against conviction. During a Prosecution the Accused receives additional votes equal to his Influence.

### 1.09.421 POPULAR APPEAL {#1.09.421}

A Senator Accused in a Prosecution may appeal to the people when his Faction is called upon to vote. He rolls 2d6 and modifies it by his Popularity and finds the result on the Popular Appeal Table. All negative votes are added to the votes "for" conviction; all positive votes gained are added to the votes "against" conviction. "Accused Killed" means the populace is so disgusted by the self-serving rhetoric of the Accused that they kill him themselves. If the Accused is killed in this way, the Accused is considered to have been guilty, and the Prosecutor still gains his Prior Consul marker (if any) and half of his Influence, as usual ([1.09.44](#1.09.44)). Conversely, a result of "Accused Freed" ends the Prosecution with an acquittal. In addition, one Mortality Chit is drawn for each number which exceeds 11 on the modified roll in order to see if either the Censor and/or the Prosecutor (the only two vulnerable to the chit draw) is killed by a mob enraged over this obvious frame-up.

### 1.09.422 TRIBUNES DURING PROSECUTIONS {#1.09.422}

A Tribune may be played by anyone to veto the Prosecution \[EXCEPTION: Special Major Prosecutions of Assassins ([1.09.74](#1.09.74))\]. The vetoed Prosecution still counts towards the Censor's total allowed Prosecutions for that turn. A Prosecution is not considered to be a proposal and therefore cannot be proposed with a Tribune. A Senator who makes a Popular Appeal and is not killed as a result may play a Tribune to veto the Prosecution after discovering the result of his appeal.

### 1.09.43 FAILED PROSECUTION {#1.09.43}

If the Prosecution fails, the Accused goes free and may not be Prosecuted again this turn for the same reason. Each Concession with a revealed corrupt bar is a different (separate) reason for Prosecution. However, the Accused must have the corrupt Concession at the time of the Prosecution for it to be a reason for Prosecution, e.g., if the Accused has been convicted and thus lost all of his Concessions ([1.09.441](#1.09.441) and [1.09.442](#1.09.442)), none of his prior corrupt Concessions is a valid reason for a second Prosecution within the same Senate Phase.

### 1.09.44 SUCCESSFUL PROSECUTION {#1.09.44}

If the Accused is convicted or dies as a result of the Prosecution, the Prosecutor gains the Prior Consul marker of the Accused plus half (fractions rounded up) of any Influence lost by the Accused. Note that when a senator dies, he loses ALL of his influence.

### 1.09.441 MINOR PROSECUTION CONSEQUENCES {#1.09.441}

If convicted, the Accused loses 5 Popularity (which can become negative), 5 Influence (to a minimum of 0), any Prior Consul marker, and must return all of his Concessions to the Forum.

### 1.09.442 MAJOR PROSECUTION CONSEQUENCES {#1.09.442}

If convicted, the Accused is executed ([1.05.3](../01-basic-game/1.05-mortality-phase.md#1.05.3)) (thematically, it could be considered permanent exile, with the same in-game effects as death).

### 1.09.45 END OF PROSECUTIONS {#1.09.45}

After completing Prosecutions, the Censor turns the meeting back to the normal Presiding Magistrate. Remove all Corrupt and Major markers on Senators in Rome (but not on Senators away from Rome). Adjust Armaments and Shipbuilding Concessions to hide the corrupt bar ([1.09.631](#1.09.631)).

### 1.09.5 GOVERNORSHIPS {#1.09.5}

When a Province is created, place its card in the Forum yellow side up. Each Province in the Forum has a Governorship that the Senate must fill from its membership (in Rome) during the Senate Phase. Elections for all open Governorships are conducted immediately after Prosecutions and before conducting other business. Elections continue until a Governor is selected or there is only one eligible candidate remaining. When a Governor is elected, the Province card is placed with his Senator card, and he must leave Rome immediately without participating in any remaining Senate votes. Adjust his Faction's Vote Tally dial to reflect his departure from Rome. Elections for multiple Governorships, including recalls ([1.09.52](#1.09.52)), may be held simultaneously so that Governors will be elected (or rejected) in tandem and depart at the same time, but no other proposal may be added to the same vote. The holder of a Major Office may not be proposed as a Governor.

### 1.09.51 TERM {#1.09.51}

Governorships last up to 3 turns. Set the term dial on the Province to "3" when a Governor is elected. Reduce it by 1 at the end of each Revenue Phase ([1.06.6](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.6)) unless its Governor is in Revolt. When the dial moves off of "1", the Governor returns to Rome. He may not be re-elected to that or another Governorship without his consent during the turn of his return unless there are no other eligible candidates in Rome. Likewise, a newly recalled Governor ([1.09.52](#1.09.52)) may not be sent out again on the same turn he was recalled without his consent unless there are no other eligible candidates in Rome.

### 1.09.52 RECALL {#1.09.52}

A non-rebel Governor may be recalled immediately to Rome by electing a new Governor, provided the recalled Governor was not elected this same turn. The replacement Governor inherits the Province with the term dial reset for 3 turns.

### 1.09.53 UNALIGNED GOVERNORS {#1.09.53}

An Unaligned Senator in the Forum may be elected Governor. He is removed from the Forum and becomes immune to Persuasion Attempts until his return to Rome, when he is again placed in the Forum. He collects taxes for the State ([1.06.51](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.51)) but does not take Provincial Spoils ([1.06.13](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.13)).

### 1.09.54 VACANT PROVINCES {#1.09.54}

All Provinces must have a Governor at the end of the Senate Phase unless there are no eligible candidates available. If a Governor dies during the Senate Phase after all vacant Governorships have been assigned, another Governor must be elected at the earliest opportunity. A Province without a Governor does not generate or lose money for the State, cannot be Developed, and cannot be selected for, or affected by, resolution of (either side of) these Events: Internal Disorder, Pretender Emerges, Barbarian Raids, and Trial of Verres.

### 1.09.6 OTHER BUSINESS {#1.09.6}

The Presiding Magistrate may now conduct other business by proposing whatever motions he wishes. Each proposal may consist of only one kind of proposal at a time. For example, a proposal could not group a Land Bill with a Concession vote to increase the chances of passage. Proposals of the same type may always be grouped together \[EXCEPTION: Land Bills ([1.09.62](#1.09.62))\]. The Presiding Magistrate may close the meeting whenever he chooses, as long as there is no unresolved motion on the floor. He simply states "the Senate is adjourned" and thereby ends the opportunity for Assassinations ([1.09.7](#1.09.7)). The closing of the Senate cannot be vetoed and does not require a vote; however a Tribune can be used to temporarily keep the Senate open in order to introduce a single proposal ([1.09.151](#1.09.151)).

### 1.09.61 ASSIGN CONCESSIONS {#1.09.61}

Proposals may be made to assign a specific Concession from the Forum to a specific Aligned Senator present in Rome. Group proposals may be made to simultaneously assign different Concessions to different Senators. If a proposal to assign a Concession fails (whether singly or as part of a group), that Concession card is flipped over to indicate that it may not be proposed again during the same turn. There is no limit to the number of Concessions a Senator may control. The Land Commissioner Concession may be played or assigned only if a Land Bill is in effect; once assigned it must be returned to the Forum if there are no Land Bills in effect at the end of a Senate Phase.

### 1.09.62 LAND BILLS {#1.09.62}

The Senate can improve the Unrest Level by passing Land Bills. Three kinds are available; Type I is a one-turn, single payment measure costing 20 Talents, while Types II and III are permanent measures requiring payments of 5 and 10 Talents every turn, but lowering the Unrest Level only during the turn of their passage. The Senate may propose no more than one Land Bill of each Type per turn. The number of Land Bills that may be in effect at one time is limited by the number of such markers available.

A Land Bill proposal must name two different consenting Senators in Rome as Sponsor and Co-Sponsor. If the Land Bill passes, lower the Unrest Level and raise the Popularity of the Sponsor and Co-Sponsor as indicated on the Land Bills Table. Place the appropriate Land Bill marker in the applicable box of the State Revenue as a reminder of funds owed by the State during the Revenue Phase ([1.06.53](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.53)). Every Senator who votes against a Land Bill lowers his Popularity as indicated on the Land Bills Table. Popularity changes for Sponsoring, Co-Sponsoring, and Voting are cumulative. Senators of a player who vetoes a Land Bill with a Tribune are not penalized.

### 1.09.621 REPEALS {#1.09.621}

The Senate may attempt to repeal a Type II or III Land Bill (not a Type I), even on the same turn it passed. A Senator in Rome must volunteer to Sponsor the repeal, and he must have Popularity equal to or greater than the amount he will lose by sponsoring and voting for the repeal. The Sponsor lowers his Popularity as indicated on the Land Bills Table and must vote for that repeal. Popularity losses for Sponsoring and Voting are cumulative. If the repeal passes, raise the Unrest Level as indicated on the Land Bills Table. Senators who vote for the repeal lower their Popularity accordingly. Only one Land Bill repeal may be attempted per turn.

### 1.09.622 PAYMENT {#1.09.622}

Payment for Land Bills is made during the Revenue Phase ([1.06.53](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.53)) by subtracting the costs of any current Land Bills from the State Treasury. Remove the Type I Land Bill marker after payment is made.

### 1.09.623 ASSASSINATION FOR LANDBILL {#1.09.623}

If both the Sponsor and Co-Sponsor of a Land Bill are from the same Faction, they risk Assassination ([1.09.7](#1.09.7)). Prior to the end of the vote on the Land Bill, one Senator may attempt an Assassination of either the Sponsor or Co-Sponsor by rolling on the Assassination Table. If caught, that Senator is killed. However, there are no further consequences to his Faction as would normally occur due to a caught Assassin ([1.09.74](#1.09.74)). Regardless of the outcome, the vote on the Land Bill continues.

### 1.09.63 RECRUITMENT OF FORCES {#1.09.63}

The Senate may vote to raise or eliminate Forces. The maximum number of Legions and Fleets the Republic may have as Active Forces is 25 of each. A Legion or Fleet cannot be both eliminated and built (or rebuilt) in the same Senate Phase. The number to be raised must be specified in the original proposal. Theater and Commander must be the subject of subsequent proposals. Forces raised are taken from the Force Pool and placed in the Active Forces boxes. The State Treasury must immediately pay 10 Talents for each new unit raised. The Senate may only vote to eliminate units located in the Active Forces boxes.

### 1.09.631 CONCESSION GAINS {#1.09.631}

Any Senator who holds the Armaments or Ship Building Concessions **must** immediately collect the income listed on the Concession when Legions or Fleets are built. Senators taking money in this way reveal the Concession's corrupt bar. This indicates that the Senator is liable to a Minor Prosecution ([1.09.412](#1.09.412)) during the next Senate Phase.

### 1.09.64 DEPLOYMENT OF FORCES {#1.09.64}

The Senate may send a Commander and a specific group of units in the Active Forces boxes to attack any Active, Inactive, or Imminent War, including a Civil War ([1.11.36](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.36)). The Senate may not send a Force to fight a War unless it is supported by the number of Fleets required by that War. Multiple Forces may be sent against the same War ([1.09.645](#1.09.645)).

### 1.09.641 MILITARY COMMAND {#1.09.641}

When a measure to send a Force to attack passes, those units are placed on the Commander's card, and he is immediately absent from Rome and placed overlapping the War. Forces already on the War without a Commander join his Force. Only the Field Consul, the Rome Consul and the Dictator (with the Master of Horse) can be sent to War. The Field Consul must be sent to War before (or at the same time as) the Rome Consul, but there is no such limitation as to the sequence in which the Dictator can be sent to War. These proposals may be made separately or in a package.

### 1.09.642 DEPARTURE OF A PRESIDING MAGISTRATE {#1.09.642}

Passing any measure sending the Presiding Magistrate to War ends the Senate Phase. Consequently, a player wishing to enact some other proposal during that Senate Phase may play a Tribune card before or during his turn to vote on sending the Presiding Magistrate away, not as a veto, but as a measure to suspend the vote until after his proposal has been acted upon. If the proposal put forth from this Tribune results in making the suspended Deployment proposal invalid (e.g., the troops no longer exist), the suspended proposal automatically fails.

### 1.09.643 MINIMUM FORCE {#1.09.643}

A Force sent to fight a Land Battle ([1.10.11](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.11)) must contain at least one Legion (or to a Naval Battle, [1.10.12](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.12), at least one Fleet). The Senate may not propose to send a Commander to fight a War without his consent unless the Strength of his Force (including his Military rating) ([1.10.11](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.11), [1.10.12](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.12)) is greater than or equal to the corresponding and applicable Land or Fleet Strength of the War (including any applicable Leader) ([1.07.33](#1.07.33), [1.07.332](#1.07.332), [1.07.342](#1.07.342)). If, as a result of losses sustained in a previous turn, a Proconsul's Force falls beneath that of the opposing War, he has no such right of refusal and must attack again the following turn. [EXCEPTION: If the Proconsul has insufficient Fleet Support, no Legions when fighting a Land battle, or no Fleets when fighting a Naval battle, he will be recalled when the Senate Phase ends ([1.09.9](#1.09.9))]. The Senate may not recall Legions or Fleets from a Proconsul without his consent that will reduce the Strength of his Force to less than the corresponding and applicable Land or Fleet Strength of his War.

### 1.09.644 RECALL {#1.09.644}

The Senate may vote to recall or replace any Proconsul ([1.10.8](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.8)). If the vote succeeds, he returns to Rome. If recalled, place his Force in the Active Forces boxes. If replaced, place his Force, the replacement Commander, and any additional Force deployed with the new Commander onto the War. The Senate may also recall part of a non-rebel Force to the Active Forces boxes, leaving the rest with its Commander in the field, providing the recall follows the standard Minimum Force rules. ([1.09.643](#1.09.643)). The Senate may recall all or part of a Force that has no Commander. The Senate may neither recall nor replace a Commander (or his Force) who was deployed during the current Senate Phase, nor a Commander (or his Force) if he has already been reinforced in the current Senate Phase.

### 1.09.645 MULTIPLE FORCES {#1.09.645}

The Senate may send more than one Force under different Commanders to fight the same War. However, if they do so, each Force must attack separately, one at a time, until the War is defeated or all Forces have attacked. The advantage of sending separate Forces to fight a single War is that each Disaster and Standoff number ([1.10.21](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.21), [1.10.31](../01-basic-game/1.10-combat-phase.md#1.10.31)) can only be applied once a turn.

> **EXAMPLE:** A natural roll of 14 would result in a Disaster for the first battle resolution of the Jugurthine War, but a subsequent natural roll of 14 for a different Force against the same War on the same turn would not be considered a Disaster.

### 1.09.646 BASE PROVINCE STRENGTH AND GARRISONS {#1.09.646}

Each Province has a Base Land and Naval Strength, which depend on if the Province is Developed or not. These Base Province Strengths are defenses innate to the Provinces and can be enhanced by Garrisons (Advanced Rule 2.02 expands on the role of Provincial Forces). The Senate may vote to send one or more Legions to a Province (except one with a Rebel Governor) to augment its Base Land Strength. Once sent, they remain there until recalled and follow the Province to the Forum when it is up for reassignment. Garrisons cannot be recalled in the same turn they are deployed, or from a Province with a Rebel Governor. Garrisons are under command of the current Governor. The Senate pays Garrison Maintenance costs ([1.06.53](../01-basic-game/1.06-revenue-phase.md#1.06.53)) unless the Province has a Rebel Governor. The only thing that Garrisoned Legions do (without using the Provincial Wars ([2.02](../02-advanced-game/2.02-provincial-wars.md#2.02)) and Rebel Governor ([2.03](../02-advanced-game/2.03-rebel-governors.md#2.03)) Advanced Rules) is protect the Province and Governor from dangerous Events (e.g., [1.09.6461](#1.09.6461)).

### 1.09.6461 FRONTIER PROVINCES {#1.09.6461}

Provinces with underscored names and black-bordered silhouettes are Frontier Provinces, which are susceptible to the Barbarian Raids Events (in the Middle and Late Republics) and should be Garrisoned accordingly.

### 1.09.647 REINFORCEMENTS {#1.09.647}

The Senate may send additional Forces to a Proconsul or a province without a Rebel Governor during the Senate Phase. If a Proconsul has no Legions left or insufficient Fleets to prosecute the War, he must be reinforced or he will be recalled at the end of the current Senate Phase. A Commander that left Rome in the current Senate Phase may not be reinforced.

### 1.09.7 ASSASSINS {#1.09.7}

Players may attempt to eliminate opposing Senators by announcing an Assassination attempt. It will be carried out by a specific Senator belonging to the player attempting the Assassination. The player making the attempt may add to their Assassination roll by playing one or more Assassin cards prior to the resolution ([1.09.72](#1.09.72)), but possession of an Assassin card is not necessary to attempt an Assassination. Non-targeted Factions may not interfere with this attempt with their own Assassin or Bodyguard cards. No Faction may be the target of more than one attempt per turn, and no Faction may attempt more than one Assassination per turn. A Faction may not attempt to Assassinate one of its own Senators.

### 1.09.71 SENATE IN SESSION {#1.09.71}

Assassinations may be attempted only while the Senate is in session (i.e., in the Senate Phase) and only by and against Senators in Rome. Once the Senate is adjourned, it is no longer possible to attempt an Assassination during that turn. The timing of an Assassination attempt can be critical, so the players may want to agree beforehand on a short phrase (e.g., "die swine!") that will mark the exact moment of the attempt. It will thus be easier to decide if a sole Consul was killed before he could finish announcing the appointment of one of his fellow Faction members as Dictator. No other card besides Assassin may be played between when the Assassination is called and when the 1d6 roll is made.

### 1.09.72 RESOLUTION {#1.09.72}

The Assassin announces the Senator making the attempt and his target before rolling 1d6. Results are found on the Assassination Table.

### 1.09.721 SUCCESSFUL ASSASSINATION {#1.09.721}

If the Presiding Magistrate dies, the vote continues with the next HRAO acting as Presiding Magistrate. A nominee up for an Major Office who is Assassinated immediately cancels the current proposal and a new nominee (or set of nominees) must be provided by the Presiding Magistrate. The exceptions are Concession Assignments ([1.09.61](#1.09.61)) and Consul for Life nominations ([1.09.821](#1.09.821)), which can only be proposed once a turn. If the Prosecutor dies, the Prosecution is cancelled but still counts towards the Censor's limit. If the Censor dies during the Prosecution step, the current Prosecution is cancelled and no more Prosecutions are possible. A Senator's vote is counted even if he is dead by the end of the vote (as long as he voted before he died). A Land Bill vote is never cancelled by the death of a Senator, whether he is Sponsor or Co-Sponsor.

### 1.09.73 BODYGUARDS {#1.09.73}

If the target Senator has one or more "Secret Bodyguard" cards, he may announce after the roll how many of those cards he will play to defend against the Assassination attempt. Each Bodyguard so used subtracts 1 from the roll and is discarded after use. The Open Bodyguard card must be in play prior to an Assassination attempt to have any effect. If the Assassin is not caught, for each Bodyguard card played, the Assassin must roll again with all applicable modifiers solely to determine if he is caught. It is therefore possible for the first roll to kill the victim and a subsequent roll to result in the Assassin's capture.

### 1.09.74 PUNISHMENT {#1.09.74}

A caught Assassin is killed. In addition, his Faction Leader loses 5 Influence and, if he is in Rome, is the subject of an immediate Special Major Prosecution, in which he MUST make a Popular Appeal ([1.09.421](#1.09.421)). However, instead of modifying the Popular Appeal roll by his own Popularity, he must subtract the Popularity of the target Senator. So, if the target had negative Popularity, add it to the roll. The Censor is Presiding Magistrate for this Prosecution, even if he is the Accused Faction Leader. If there is no Censor, the current Presiding Magistrate runs the vote. Neither a Prosecutor nor an Advocate is selected for this Prosecution. Influence of the Accused is counted as normal. A Special Major Prosecution cannot be vetoed. A Special Major Prosecution only temporarily suspends the current proposal; the proposal continues after the Prosecution is resolved, if possible. If the Faction Leader is found guilty he is killed and any Family card belonging to the Faction Leader goes to the bottom of the Curia. If guilty, in addition to his own death, a number of Mortality Chits equal to the target's Popularity (if positive) are drawn, and other members of the Assassin's Faction currently in Rome whose chits are drawn are also implicated and killed. If the caught Assassin was the Faction Leader he is automatically killed, and any Family card belonging to the Faction Leader goes to the bottom of the Curia. There is no Special Major Prosecution but chits are drawn as above to implicate additional Faction members. The Faction is eliminated if it loses its last Senator via Punishment for trying an Assassination ([1.05.4](../01-basic-game/1.05-mortality-phase.md#1.05.4)).

### 1.09.8 MISC SENATE RULES {#1.09.8}

The following proposals and rules apply alongside the routine procedures of the Senate Phase.

### 1.09.81 REPOPULATING ROME {#1.09.81}

Whenever the number of Aligned Senators currently in Rome is below 8 during a Senate Phase, the top Senator card in the Curia is promoted to active status in the Faction of the player with the fewest total Senators. Ties are resolved in favor of the player with the least total Influence currently in Rome, with further ties being broken by a dice roll. Such promotions continue until the number of active Senators in Rome reaches 8 or the Curia is empty. If the Curia has no Senators, those in the Forum can be substituted. The choice of which of the available Senators to take is up to the receiving player. If no further Senators are currently available in either the Curia or the Forum, no such promotion occurs.

### 1.09.82 CONSUL FOR LIFE {#1.09.82}

If a Consul for Life is elected or appointed, his player controls all nonrebel Factions during the Senate Phase and will win the Game should the Consul for Life survive to the end of the Game ([1.12.2](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.2)), unless all players lose ([1.12.1](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.1)) or a Rebel wins first ([1.12.2](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.2), [1.12.3](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.3)).

### 1.09.821 CONSUL FOR LIFE (ELECTION) {#1.09.821}

At any time during the Senate Phase following the Consular elections, the Presiding Magistrate, or a player using a Tribune, may nominate any Aligned Senator in Rome with at least 21 Influence "Consul for Life". The exception to this is it cannot be proposed while the Censor is Presiding Magistrate during Prosecutions. The nominee may already hold an office. For this vote, the nominee may add his Influence to his vote total. Consul for Life can be proposed only once per turn and cannot be vetoed. If a Tribune is used to propose Consul for Life, it may, however, be cancelled by an appropriate Intrigue card (e.g., Graft). Assassination attempts may take place during such a vote, but once elected or appointed, the Consul For Life cannot be assassinated, not even by a Senator belonging to the Rebel Faction.

### 1.09.822 CONSUL FOR LIFE (APPOINTMENT) {#1.09.822}

If at any time in the Game an Aligned Senator is in Rome and has at least 35 Influence, and the Military Reforms Law (Middle Republic) is not already in place, he immediately becomes the Consul for Life. If two or more Senators qualify in the same turn, the one exceeding 34 by the most is the Consul for Life. If equal, the Senator belonging to the Faction with the most combined Influence is Consul for Life. Achieving Consul for Life in this manner is an automatic appointment - there is no chance for an Assassination attempt. In the exceedingly rare event that Senators are both elected and appointed Consul for Life in the same turn, the elected one ceases to be Consul for Life.

### 1.09.823 CONSUL FOR LIFE END GAME {#1.09.823}

If a Senator is elected or appointed Consul for Life, the player who controls him takes over all non-rebel Factions during (only) the Senate Phase, playing them and making all decisions for them. Players regain control of their Factions (in the Senate Phase) if the Consul for Life dies. Consul for Life is not an office, even though it uses a similar marker. Being Consul for Life does not make the Senator the HRAO or the Presiding Magistrate. The player may look at non-rebel players' hands in the Senate Phase, but may not play any of their cards. The player may not force other Factions to make Assassination attempts or Public Agreements, or vote against a Land Bill. The Consul for Life may not become a Rebel ([1.11.3](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.3), [1.11.32](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.32)), although he may be in the Rebel Faction. A Faction with the Primary Rebel may vote normally and conduct Assassinations (but not against the Consul for Life). The Republic may collapse ([1.12.1](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.1)) or the Primary Rebel can still win ([1.12.2](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.2)) in the turn in which the Consul for Life is elected or appointed - otherwise the player who controls the Consul for Life will win at the end of the Game ([1.12.2](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.2), [1.12.3](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.3)), if the Consul for Life survives until then.

### 1.09.83 MINOR MOTIONS {#1.09.83}

Any player (i.e., not only the Presiding Magistrate) may make gratuitous motions to enhance the atmosphere of the Game or inform players of his desire or dislike for a certain course of action. Passage of Minor Motions has no Game impact. Defeat of a Minor Motion carries no loss of Influence penalty to the initiator of that motion. Votes of censure or gratitude, reprimands, personally insulting proposals, etc., can all be appropriate.

### 1.09.9 AUTOMATIC RECALLS {#1.09.9}

Once the Senate is closed, all Proconsuls who have insufficient Fleet Support, no Legions when fighting a Land Battle, or no Fleets when fighting a Naval Battle are automatically recalled. Any Force without a Commander is also automatically recalled at this time. Fleet Support is not required for the automatic recall of Legions.
