# 1.10. Combat Phase {#1.10}

[← I. Basic Game](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

### 1.10.1 WAR {#1.10.1}

Commanders on Wars now fight battles. Resolve Wars in the order in which the Senate dispatched the Commanders who were placed last on each War. Break ties with high rolls on 2d6 between Commanders who were sent simultaneously to different Wars. Resolve all battles against each War before resolving the next War. If more than one Commander is on the same War, they may choose to attack in any order. If they cannot agree, attack in order of highest rolls on 2d6. Each Commander on a War must attack unless his War is eliminated before he fights it. Rome is always the attacker.

### 1.10.11 LAND BATTLES {#1.10.11}

Land Battles may only be fought if enough Fleets are present to meet or exceed the Fleet Support of the War. In Land battles the Commander adds his Military rating to the Strength of his Army. Army Strength equals the number of Legions in the Army with Veteran Legions ([1.10.5](#1.10.5)) counting double. The points added by the Commander's Military rating cannot be greater than the Strength of his Army. From this he subtracts the Land Strength number of the War (the number next to the Swords icon), which may be modified by the presence of a Matching War ([1.07.332](../01-basic-game/1.07-forum-phase.md#1.07.332)) or Leader ([1.07.342](../01-basic-game/1.07-forum-phase.md#1.07.342)). To this number is added 3d6, and the result is located on the Combat Results Table to determine the outcome (see also [1.10.21](#1.10.21) and [1.10.31](#1.10.31)).

### 1.10.12 NAVAL BATTLES {#1.10.12}

Those Wars that show a Fleet Strength (i.e., a number next to the Ship icon) require two separate battles, one Naval Battle and one Land Battle. The enemy Fleet Strength must be defeated before his land Forces may be attacked. A Naval Battle is the same as Land Battle except the number of Fleets, rather than Legions, is counted. War cards whose Fleets have been defeated are marked with a Naval Victory marker. Once the enemy Fleets are defeated, if a Legion is still present, the Commander (at his discretion) may immediately attack the Land Strength of the War ([1.10.11](#1.10.11)) in the same Combat Phase, provided there are still sufficient Fleets in the Force to support the Army and the Commander was neither killed ([1.10.7](#1.10.7)) nor captured ([1.10.71](#1.10.71)) in the Naval Battle. Even if the Land Battle is not won, the Naval Battle need not be re-fought in subsequent turns. The War can be won in subsequent turns by defeating only the enemy Land Strength. The Senate may decide to send no Legions to conduct such a War, endeavoring to defeat the enemy Fleets in one turn and its Land Strength in a subsequent turn. If Rome sends a Fleet with no Legions, the Commander and his Force return to Rome immediately if he achieves a "Victory" result. If the Senate attempts to win both the Naval and Land Battles in the same turn, it must send a combined Force of Fleets and Legions, and must first defeat the enemy fleets. Accompanying Legions could be lost in the ensuing Naval Battle ([1.10.61](#1.10.61)).

### 1.10.2 DEFEATS {#1.10.2}

A result of "Defeat" means the Roman Commander and his Master of Horse (if present) are killed and their Force returns the number of Legions and Fleets (if present) indicated on the Combat Results Table to the Force Pool. Surviving Forces remain on the War card until the next Senate Phase, when they may be recalled or reinforced. The Unrest Level is immediately increased by 2.

### 1.10.21 DISASTERS {#1.10.21}

Each War and Leader has a black Disaster number following a D on the right side of the card. If this number is rolled prior to any die roll modification while resolving combat (even if the number is also a Standoff number, [1.10.31](#1.10.31)), the Combat Results Table is ignored, and the Battle is an automatic "Disaster", causing loss of half (fractions rounded up) of all participating Roman forces. Each Disaster/Standoff number can only be applied once per turn per War, even if the same number appears on both a War and its Leaders. Fleet and Legion losses are each halved and rounded up separately. The Unrest Level is increased by 1. The Roman Commander remains in command as Proconsul unless he becomes a Secondary Rebel ([1.11.32](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.32)), is recalled ([1.09.644](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.644)), killed ([1.10.7](#1.10.7)), or captured ([1.10.71](#1.10.71)).

### 1.10.3 STALEMATES {#1.10.3}

A result of "Stalemate" means the War is undecided. The Roman Force loses the number of Legions and Fleets (if present) indicated on the Combat Results Table to the Force Pool. Surviving Forces remain on the War card until the next Senate Phase, when they may be recalled or reinforced. There is no effect on the Unrest Level. The Roman Commander remains in command as Proconsul unless he becomes a Secondary Rebel ([1.11.32](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.32)), is recalled ([1.09.644](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.644)), killed ([1.10.7](#1.10.7)), or captured ([1.10.71](#1.10.71)).

### 1.10.31 STANDOFFS {#1.10.31}

Each War and Leader has one or two gray Standoff numbers following an "S" on the right side of the card. If these numbers are rolled prior to any die roll modification while resolving combat (and it is not also a Disaster, see [1.10.21](#1.10.21)), the Combat Results Table is ignored, and the Battle is an automatic Standoff, causing loss of one quarter (fractions rounded up) of all participating Roman Forces. However, each Disaster/Standoff number can only be applied once per turn per War. Fleet and Legion losses are quartered and rounded separately. There is no effect on the Unrest Level. The Roman Commander remains in command as Proconsul unless he becomes a Secondary Rebel ([1.11.32](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.32)), is recalled ([1.09.644](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.644)), killed ([1.10.7](#1.10.7)), or captured ([1.10.71](#1.10.71)).

### 1.10.4 VICTORY {#1.10.4}

A Land "Victory" lowers the Unrest Level by 1 and eliminates the War. Any other Commander on the War besides the victorious Commander returns to Rome and returns his Force to the Active Forces boxes. A Naval "Victory" also lowers the Unrest Level by 1 and results in a Naval Victory marker being placed on the War. The Roman Force loses the number of Legions and Fleets (if it has them) indicated on the Combat Results Table, and the surviving Force remains on the Commander's card, if the Commander survives ([1.10.7](#1.10.7)). If a victorious Commander dies, his Force returns to the Active Forces boxes. In some cases one or more Provinces will be created and placed in the Forum. The victorious Commander increases both his Popularity and Influence by half (fractions rounded up) of the unmodified (i.e., printed, so do not include Leader or Matching War modifiers) Land or Fleet War Strength number (or both, if both were defeated in this turn by the same Commander). Increase the State Treasury for Spoils of War by an amount equal to the number inside the Coin on the bottom right of the card (except for Naval Battles). Revolts do not yield Spoils of War.

> **EXAMPLE:** Marius is dispatched with 9 Legions to deal with the Gladiator Revolt that is matched with the Leader Spartacus. Marius' Military rating of 4 is added to the number of his 9 Legions, for a total Strength of 13. If Marius had only 3 Legions, he could only add 3 from his Military rating ([1.10.11](#1.10.11)). The Land Strength on the Gladiator Revolt card is 6, which is increased to 11 because the appropriate Leader card, Spartacus, happens to be in play. 13 minus 11 is 2. The player controlling Marius then rolls 3d6, rolling a 10, which is added to the base of 2 for a final result of 12. A 12 on the Combat Results Table is a "Stalemate" with a loss of 1 Legion and 1 Fleet. Marius loses 1 Legion (he has no Fleets), and must draw 1 Mortality Chit to check for his own death ([1.10.7](#1.10.7)). Had he had a Fleet to lose, he would have had to draw 2 Mortality Chits. Had the Combat roll been 11 or 6, the result would have been a "Disaster" with the loss of 5 Legions. Had the Combat roll been a 14 or 16, the result would have been a "Standoff" with the loss of 3 Legions.

### 1.10.5 VETERANS {#1.10.5}

One Legion from among the survivors of a Land Battle that is a Stalemate, Standoff, or Victory is transformed into a Veteran Legion by flipping it to its Veteran side. A Senate Legion in a Senate Victory ([1.11.371](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.371)), a Rebel Legion in a Senate Defeat ([1.11.373](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.373)), and one surviving Legion (if any) on each side in a Civil War Stalemate ([1.11.372](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.372)) becomes Veteran. Veterans are not created in Naval Battles. The corresponding Legion Allegiance marker is placed on the Commander's card until he dies or the Legion is eliminated. The Legion will remain a Veteran Legion until eliminated, raised while disbanded ([2.04.3](../02-advanced-game/2.04-legionary-disbandment-recall.md#2.04.3)), or its Senator dies while it is disbanded ([2.04.2](../02-advanced-game/2.04-legionary-disbandment-recall.md#2.04.2)), even if placed under another Commander. Veteran Legions count double in combat regardless of which Senator owns their Allegiance.

### 1.10.6 TAKING LOSSES {#1.10.6}

Units removed are chosen at random.

### 1.10.61 LAND LOSSES {#1.10.61}

When both Veteran and normal Legions are involved, the units eliminated must be drawn at random from among those present. If Land Forces accompany Fleets on a Naval Battle, the Land Forces take losses normally. The Commander, regardless of the Battle result, immediately loses 1 Popularity for every 2 Legions (but not Provincial Armies) lost (round down).

### 1.10.62 NAVAL LOSSES {#1.10.62}

Fleet losses always apply if Fleets are in the Commander's Force. Commanders never lose Popularity as a direct result of losing Fleets or Provincial Fleets, unlike Legions.

### 1.10.7 COMMANDER DEATH {#1.10.7}

In any battle other than Defeat, draw a number of Mortality Chits ([1.05.21](../01-basic-game/1.05-mortality-phase.md#1.05.21)) equal to the number of units lost. If a number belonging to the present Commander or Master of Horse is drawn, that Senator is killed ([1.05.3](../01-basic-game/1.05-mortality-phase.md#1.05.3)) or captured ([1.10.71](#1.10.71)). In a Senate Victory, Civil War Stalemate, or Senate Defeat ([1.11.37](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.37)), draw a number of Mortality Chits equal to the units lost from (only) the Senate Force, but these chits can affect either side. Mortality Chits belonging to other Senators have no effect. A Commander who loses his entire Force is not necessarily harmed as a result of losses taken, unless it was a Defeat or his Mortality Chit has been drawn as a result of losses taken. If the Master of Horse has been killed or captured, the Dictator may not appoint another unless he is reelected or re-appointed as Dictator. If the Dictator is killed or captured and the Master of Horse survives and is not captured, the Master of Horse returns to Rome and keeps his Master of Horse office. If Provincial Forces ([2.02](../02-advanced-game/2.02-provincial-wars.md#2.02)) or Rebel Governor ([2.03](../02-advanced-game/2.03-rebel-governors.md#2.03)) Advanced Rules are being used, a Governor can also be killed in this manner.

### 1.10.71 CAPTURE {#1.10.71}

If the last Mortality Chit drawn for Commander Death would kill the Commander or Master of Horse, two or more chits were drawn, and the battle was a Disaster, Stalemate, or Standoff, the Senator is captured instead of being killed. Captives lose all future Revenue and have their Personal Treasuries frozen except for purposes of paying the Ransom. A Captive keeps his office (provided he is returned before his term expires) and does not become a Proconsul. A Captive's Influence does not count towards that Faction's total for purposes of winning the Game, but a Consul for Life who is captured may still win the Game ([1.12.2](../01-basic-game/1.12-victory-conditions.md#1.12.2)). Captives are subject to normal Mortality Chit and Foreign Epidemic draws. The Captive may still restrict the play of a Statesmen card of the same ID#. If a Dictator or Master of Horse is captured see [1.10.7](#1.10.7).

The Captive is subject to Ransom. The Ransom amount is 10 Talents or 2 Talents per Influence of the Captive, whichever is greater. Ransom money can be paid from the Captive's Personal Treasury and/or his Faction Treasury. Ransoms may be paid at any time prior to defeat of the War, or prior to the next Forum Phase in the case of Barbarian Raids. Captives always return to Rome when Ransomed; they are killed if their War is defeated, discarded, or otherwise returned to the deck.

### 1.10.8 PROCONSUL {#1.10.8}

A Commander who survives a non-victorious battle, or who gains a Naval Victory but does not fight a Land Battle despite having a Legion in his Force, and is not captured, loses any existing Major Office, becomes a Proconsul and immediately receives a Prior Consul marker (unless he already has one). He remains in command of his Force and away from Rome unless he becomes a Secondary Rebel or is recalled by the Senate during a Senate Phase ([1.09.644](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.644)). He remains Proconsul as long as he retains his command against the War he was originally sent to fight. This is the only case in which a Commander other than the current Consuls or Dictator may command non-rebel Forces \[EXCEPTION: Governors in the Advanced Game ([2.02](../02-advanced-game/2.02-provincial-wars.md#2.02))\]. If a Dictator is made Proconsul, his Master of Horse returns to Rome and keeps his office. There is no limit to the number of Proconsuls that can exist. A Proconsul is not a Consul. Proconsul is a Major Office.

### 1.10.9 UNPROSECUTED WARS {#1.10.9}

An Active War is considered "Prosecuted" if at least one of the following requirements is met:

- A Land Battle was fought against the Active War this turn and the Active War ended the Combat Phase with at least one Legion and the required minimum Fleet Support; or
- A Naval Battle was fought against the Active War this turn and the Active War ended the Combat Phase with at least one Fleet and/or a Naval Victory marker

If neither of these requirements is met, the Active War (including a Civil War, 1.11.3) is moved to an "Unprosecuted War" space of the Forum at the end of the Combat Phase. The only effect is that the Unrest Level is increased by 1 for each Unprosecuted War at the start of every Population Phase ([1.08.11](../01-basic-game/1.08-population-phase.md#1.08.11)). Since a War can only be moved to an Unprosecuted War space during the Combat Phase, it is not Unprosecuted in the Population Phase of the turn in which it is drawn (or the turn after it is created, in the case of a Civil War).
