# 2.04. Legionary Disbandment & Recall {#2.04}

[← II. Advanced Game](README.md) | [Rules Index](../README.md)

### 2.04.1 OVERVIEW {#2.04.1}

Commanders with the Allegiance markers of Veteran Legions may gain Influence and Oratory by disbanding these Legions. These Advanced Rules add moderate complexity and can be used once players have some familiarity with the Basic Rules.

### 2.04.2 DISBANDMENT {#2.04.2}

When it is his turn to play cards ([1.11.1](../01-basic-game/1.11-revolution-phase.md#1.11.1)), a Victorious non-rebel returning Commander may disband any Veteran Legions in his Force for which he holds the Allegiance markers. The identities of the disbanded Legions are noted by retaining their Legion Allegiance markers on his card and flipping them to their disbanded side. The Legions are then placed in the Bank (not the available Force Pool) with their Veteran side up. For each Legion disbanded, the Senator increases both his Oratory and Influence by 1. When a Senator who holds the Allegiance marker of any disbanded Legion dies, his disbanded Legions are placed in the available Force Pool and lose their Veteran Status.

### 2.04.3 RECALL {#2.04.3}

A Consul or Dictator may recall his disbanded Veteran Legions from the Bank during the Senate Phase ([1.09.63](../01-basic-game/1.09-senate-phase.md#1.09.63)) by paying 10 Talents per Legion from his Personal or Faction Treasury (No Recruitment and Manpower Shortages do not affect the ability or cost to recall Legions). For each Legion he recalls, the Senator flips its Allegiance marker on his card and decreases both his Oratory and Influence by 1. Recalled Legions retain their Veteran status and must be maintained by the Senate at the normal rate.

Once all the remaining Legions from the available Force Pool have been raised, the Senate may also raise disbanded Legions from the Bank. Disbanded Legions raised in this way may no longer be recalled by their Senator and no longer have Veteran Status. Give the Legion Allegiance marker back to the Bank, but the Senator keeps his +1 ORA and +1 INF.
